
From reed-flute hear what tale it tells;What plaint it makes of absence’ ills: 
“From jungle-bed since me they tore,Men’s, women’s, eyes have wept right sore.My breast I tear and rend in twain,To give, through sighs, vent to my pain.Who’s from his home snatched far away,Longs to return some future day.I sob and sigh in each retreat,Be’t joy or grief for which men meet.   5They fancy they can read my heart;Grief’s secrets I to none impart.My throes and moans form but one chain,Men’s eyes and ears catch not their train.Though soul and body be as one,Sight of his soul hath no man won. 
A flame’s the flute’s wail; not a breath,That flame who feels not, doom him death.The flame of love, ’tis, prompts the flute,10   Wine’s ferment, love; its tongue not mute.The absent lover’s flute’s no toy;Its trills proclaim his grief, his joy.Or bane, or cure, the flute is still;Content, complaining, as you will.It tells its tale of burning grief;Recounts how love is mad, in brief.The lover lover’s pangs best knows;As ear receives tongue’s plaint of woes.Through grief, his day is but a dawn;15   Each day of sorrow, torment’s pawn.My days are waste; take thou no heed,Thou still are left; my joy, indeed.Whole seas a fish will never drown;A poor man’s day seems all one frown.What boot from counsel to a fool?Waste not thy words; thy wrath let cool.Cast off lust’s bonds; stand free from all.Slave not for pelf; be not greed’s thrall.Pour rivers into one small gill,20   It can but hold its little fill.The eye’s a vase that’s ne’er content;The oyster’s filled ere pearl is sent. The heart that’s bleeding from love’s dart,From vice of greed is kept apart.Then hie thee, love, a welcome guest; — Physician thou to soothe my breast.Thou cure of pride and shame in me;Old Galen’s skill was nought to theeThrough love, this earthly frame ascends25   To heaven; a hill, to skip pretends. 
In trance of love, Mount Sinai shakes,At God’s descent; ‘and Moses quakes.’ Found I the friend on whom I dote,I’d emulate flute’s dulcet note.But from my love, while torn away,Unmeaning words alone I say.The spring is o’er; the rose is gone;The song of Philomel is done.His love was all; himself, a note.His love, alive; himself, dead mote.   30Who feels not love’s all-quick’ning flame,Is like the bird whose wing is lame.Can I be quiet, easy, glad,When my delight’s away? No! Sad.Love bids my plaint all bonds to burst.My heart would break, with silence curst.A mirror best portrays when bright;Begrimed with rust, its gleam grows slight.Then wipe such foul alloy away;Bright shall it, so, reflect each ray.”   35Thou’st heard what tale the flute can tell;Such is my case; sung all too well. 






I. The Prince and the Handmaid 
A prince there was, long since in time it is.Of Church and State the power and wealth were his.The chase on horse one day to follow, bent;’With pompous courtier-train afield he went.A handmaid fair was wand’ring near a grove.Her he espied, and straightway fell in love.His heart was snared; her form its cage, its stall.He lavished gold; and made her thus his thrall.But now, behold the wayward spite of fate!5   The maid fell sick, this prince’s joy to bate. 
An ass had Hodge; no saddle to the fore.A saddle bought; a wolf straight Jacky tore.A jug had Dick; the well, alas, was dry.The well then filled; the jug was broke hard by. 
Now leeches called the prince, from left, from right.“Two lives,” quoth he, “depend upon your might.My health is naught; she’s life of life to me.I’m sad at heart; my sov’reign balm is she.Who finds a remedy to save her life,10   Much gold, with jewels, his; and thanks more rife.” 
All promised marvels; each, to use his skill;To search the case; to ease the maiden’s ill. 
“Each one of us has Jesu’s healing power.Of all their ills we cure men every hour.”Through pride, “God willing” said they not, I trow. Man’s nothingness, in them the Lord would show.That is to say — to leave out this good wordIs sin; said by mere rote, it will not please the Lord,How many shrink from tonguing it aloud,Whose hearts each action with “God willing” shroud.   15 
The doctors now prescribe full many a drug.In vain they ponder, vain their shoulders shrug.The maid a very skeleton became;The prince’s tears their want of skill did blame.With oxymel, through fate, did bile increase;E’en almond oil ran dry where rubbed as grease.Lax myrobalans act as nutgalls first;As naphtha feeds a fire, drinks brought but thirst. 
The prince no sooner saw their art was vain,Than barefoot sped, heaven’s worship-house to gain.   20The holy altar, there, he bowed before;With flood of tears he bathed its sacred floor.Then, heart-relieved with sorrow’s fierce outbreak,‘Mid praise and blessing, thus his suit he spake“To Thee, whose meanest gift is world-wide sway,Who know’st each secret wish, why need I pray?Our refuge art Thou in our every need;We’ve erred again; do Thou in mercy lead.’Tis Thy behest, to whom all thoughts are known,That man with words approach Thy awful throne.”   25 
His humble supplication proffered so,Sweet mercy’s fount at once did overflow.His tears undried, deep slumber on him fell,And heavenly-dulcet tones he heard thus tell:“Glad tidings, prince, to thee this day I bring:Next daydawn at thy gate a guest shall ring;A heav’n-sent stranger, versed in healing art,In him have faith; he’s true in speech and heart.Imagine not his treatment magic’s spell;30   God’s power alone can make thy maiden well.” 
The promised hour at hand, the daydawn broke;The sunbeams paled the stars; the prince awoke.An outlook sought he, whence to watch the way,And first th’ expected stranger to survey.One he espied of most majestic mien,Of radiance mild, — as sun, dark clouds between;Or moon at full; — so seem’d he from afar.Mere fancy’s pictures ever objects mar.Things non-existent often frenzy paints;35   We see mankind deluded over feints.Their peace, their war, not seldom for a sham;Their pride, their shame, some sorry epigram.But visions, such as blessed saints entrance,Reflections are from heaven’s inhabitants. 
The semblance by our prince seen in his swoon,The features wore that now in flesh are shown.The prince, in lieu of ushers, forward came,To meet the heaven-sent guest, in his own name.Their trains one column formed from mingling bands;40   Their hearts united, fettered not their hands.The prince: “Would thou’dst my soul enslaved; not she!But here below effect a cause must see. 
Be my Muhammed! I thy ‘Umar stand,With girded loins awaiting thy command.” 
Pray God to grant thee ever meek respect;The puffed-up fool’s remote from Heaven’s elect.A shameless monarch to himself’s a curse,A firebrand to his realm; nay, even worse.Food in the wilderness by God was sent;Food without toil, food gratis, without stint.   45Some graceless scoffers out of Moses’ hostDared to demand the onions, lentils lost. Such toilless food then ceased to fall from Heaven;To dig, to sow, to reap, in lieu is given.Fresh suit, much later, Jesus made; God willed;Again food rife became; men’s dishes filled.That food’s a gift from Heaven is clearly said,In Jesu’s prayer: “Give us our daily bread.” Men’s bold presumption Heaven again incensed,When basketsful to beggars were dispensed.   50Jesus proclaimed the miracle would last; — That food would never lack as in the past.Men doubted, asked for more to store away;They trusted not God’s word for bread each day.Importunate those suitors, full of greed;Heaven’s gate of mercy closed against their breed. 
Withheld is rain when alms have ceased to flow;Where fornication reigns, black death will grow.Whatever grief and sorrow’s on us sent,Of wickedness and guilt’s a punishment.   55The hardened sinner, who his God offends,A ruthless robber is; he spoils his friends.He who is shameless in his words and deeds,Despair from disappointment is his meed. 
Yon orbs of heaven obey their Maker’s word;The holy angels meekly serve the Lord.The sun’s eclipse is but a check to pride;E’en Satan’s fall presumption caused to tide.Return we now the sequel to attest,60   Of what befell our prince with his new guest. 
His circling arms the welcome form embraced,And, lover-like, with joy his neck enlaced.Kisses bestowed he on his hand and brow;Hoped kindly he’d fared well from home till now.His health and welfare asking, led him in.“Its own reward is patience,” thought he then.Patience at first is bitter; but at lengthIts fruit is sweet. It gives us heart’s content. 
Then he aloud: “A gift from God thou’rt come,65   The proverb’s pith: ‘By patience overcome.’This meeting’s the reward of all my prayer;Thou’lt solve the riddle of my dark despair.Th’ expounder, thou, of all my soul’s desires,Thou’lt extricate me from despond’s deep mires.Be welcome, then; a very friend in need;Hadst thou delayed, my case were sad indeed.Prince of physicians! Who’d not welcome thee,Deserves rejection. Do his eyes not see?” 
Urbanity’s requirements thus bested,70   Our prince the stranger to a chamber led.The maiden’s tale and case he there unfolds.,The patient, next, unveiled, the guest beholds.Complexion, pulse, egesta, all are seen;Disposing causes, symptoms, sought, I weep.Then he: “The remedies till now adduced,Have detrimental been, no good produced.The case has been from first misunderstood.Protect us, Heaven! A blundering brotherhood!” 
He saw her trouble; thence divined her ill.Her secret kept he; hidden held it still.   75The sickness was not caused by bile or spleen.The scent of perfume’s better smelt than seen.He traced her suffering to a mind oppressed;Her body sound, her soul a wish suppressed.Her hesitations made him guess her love;The symptoms plain, — her heart was sick, poor dove! 
A lover’s smart is not from fleshly pine;A probe is love; it sounds hearts’ depths, divine.Let love proceed from this or other cause,It matters not; heavenward it mortals draws.   80However well we strive love to portray,We blush thereat, when love our hearts doth sway.Words make most matters plain and manifest;But love unspoken speaks whole volumes best.When pen took up from zeal the writing trade,In love’s description, oh! such blots it made!Our wits in love’s affairs stand sore perplexed;Love only can elucidate love’s text. 
The sun alone can well explain the sun.Wilt see’t expounded? Turn to him alone.   85A shade, ’tis true, of him gives some small hint;The shining sun surpasses all comment.A shade, like evening chitchat, sends to sleep,From sun’s effulgence does full knowledge leap.That day-orb, still, each eve sets, here below;The soul-sun, God, shines in eternal glow.‘Mong things extern that orb has not a peer;But mock suns we can make, our nights to cheer.On heart unless the soul-sun cast a ray,No thought, no picture can its sheen portray.   90Can mind His glorious essence comprehend?His presence, then, to image who’ll pretend? 
Of poet’s verse when God’s the holy theme,Its minished head the sun may hide, ’twould seem.At mention of His name each breast must find,A duty ’tis His grace to call to mind.The breath of life He to this body gave,With Him to reunite, should mercy save.These years I’ve conversed with Him. Life serene!95   One repetition more! O blissful scene!How pleasant heaven and earth their smiling hold!He offers soul, mind, eye, a hundredfold! 
Beyond my strength, O try me not these days!My reason ‘d fail to falter forth Thy praise.The song of man, when uninspired by Thee,Mere fulsome, flattering trash is seen to be.Bid me describe, whose every nerve is seared,A lover’s woe, whom mistress never cheered.His lonesomeness, the anguish of his breast,100   Not here I’ll paint; elsewhere it may be best.He cries: “O succour me; I faint, I pant;And quickly; lest delay the dagger plant!” 
The Mystic true relieves each moment’s need;“To-morrow “ ‘s not a point in his pure creed.Art not persuaded so? The proverb scan:“Delay’s the thief of time;” say: “bane of man.”Love’s sweetest favours are conferred by stealth;Its darksome hints are treasured mines of wealth.The tale’s most pleasant to a lover’s ears,105   That tells of joys he’s tasted, ills he fears. 
Speak, meddler, then, in plain, unvarnished guise;No subterfuge employ; deal not in lies. 
The veil tear off, dissimulation lost:“When unadorned, beauty’s adorned the most.”Should my sweet love unveil’d her charms display,Thy smirks and smiles would all be borne away.Thy suit prefer; use moderation still:A blade of grass ne’er overturns a hill.The sun that lights and warms this nether world,If brought too near, had all to ruin hurled.   110Seek not to sow dissension in the earth;Vaunt not the Sun of Tebrīz’ holy birth.Contention’s never-ending. Better far,Commit to memory this wordy war. 
The guest, convinced that love had caused her ill,Proceeded next the prince’s mind to still.“These chambers clear of every mortal soul;Leave me alone the patient to control.No prying ear may linger in the hall;I’ve things to ask may not be heard by all.”   115 
The place was cleared; no soul remained within,Save leech and patient; other, none was seen.In gentlest tones he asked: “Where was thy home?For each town’s folk a different cure must come.What friends, what family hast left behind, — Companions, playmates, who to thee were kind?”On pulse his finger. He then, one by one,Inquired anew each point, omitting none. 
So he whose foot is wounded with a thorn,Upon his knee doth take the limb that’s torn.   120With needle’s point he seeks the intrusive dart;Not finding it, from lip he soothes the smart. 
If thorn in foot is thus a task to find,Judge what must be a rankling pang of mind.Could every chance observer spy those ills,Where’d be the cankering care, the grief that kills?Boys place a thorn beneath an ass’s tail;The cure Ned knows not; jumping’s no avail.Whisking’s still worse; it deeper drives the dart.125   ’Tis reason’s task to ease the burning smart.The ass, if sharper grow the throbs and pains,Kicks, plunges, rolls, his hide with gore bestains. 
Our doctor’s mind, by art full well prepared,With gentle measures sought the ill he feared.Once more, with tact, he bids fresh memories come,And leads the maid again to talk of home.The spring once tapped, the stream began to flow;She told th’ inquirer much he wished to know.He lends his ear as she each scene displays;130   His finger notes her pulse, as on she strays;To learn if any name should raise a start,And thus betray the secret of her heart.Anew he mentions every friend, each place;Repeated such as gave of hope a trace.He asked: “On quitting, thou, thy native town,Where first was it thy guardians set thee down?” 
A place she named, and on to others passed;Nor blush, nor pulse gave sign, or notice massed.Of lords and citizens she gave report,135   Of festivals, and seats of gay resort.Town after town, house after house, by name,She spoke about; no blush, no throb still came.Her pulse retained its normal ebb and flow.Till Samarqand’s name made her cheeks to glow,Her pulse beat high, her colour went and came;Of goldRumi youth she there had been the flame. 
This point drawn forth, — this secret once confessed,More easily our leech the sequel guessed.“O maiden, let me know this youth’s abode.”“At Holywell, near Bridge-end’s public road.”   140 
“I knew,” said he, “at once, thy case was such.Now trust me. Thee to serve I will do much.Make thyself happy. Cast away all care,As showers cheer meadows, thee I’ll greatly spare.I’ll prove thy guardian angel; never fear;Thy father’s place I’ll take; — thy burden bear.Tell not this secret unto mortal soul,However much the prince may thee cajole.Keep safe this knowledge in thy own heart’s core;So mayest thou, lass, thy lover see once more.   145Our holy Prophet’s sacred maxim ’twas:‘Who keeps his secret, speedy success has.’The seed to earth committed sure must be,Ere field or garden’s pride men may it see.If gold and silver were not hard to find,How could they grow? They soon would be out-mined.” 
The good physician’s soothing words perceived,Our maiden’s mind from carking care’s relieved.Some promises are truly meant, sincere;Others are merely made to cheat the ear.   150A good man’s promise is a gem of price;Rely not on the words of sons of vice. 
Our doctor, now, with subtle speech and wiles,The maiden’s grief had turn’d to sunny smiles.He leaves her then; seeks out the prince; and tellsThe news he’d learnt, the source of all her ills. 
“What’s now to do?” the prince’s care inquired;“Delay is dangerous; patience may grow tired.”The doctor then: “Send for him; come he must,155   From his far home to fill some post of trust.Invite him here; a dress of honour give;On him shower gold; new life ‘twill make him live.”The prince assented; took the doctor’s plan;Thought it was sound and wise from such a man.Two trusty messengers he quickly sent,Sedate, fair-spoken, loved where’er they went.To Samarqand they journeyed, prompt and sure.The goldRumi found; the prince’s message bore.“Great man of art, the marvels of thy skill,160   Are viewed with rapture, or with envy still.Our prince has need of thee, his mint to guide;For none like thee is heard of, far and wide.This dress of honour, yonder gold he sends;Requests thou’lt come, and be his best of friends.” 
The gold and dress of honour won his heart;Goodbye to home he said, with them to start.He travels joyous; thinks his luck is great;And never dreams of what’s to be his fate.An Arab charger proudly bore him on;165   He reeked not at what price all this was won.O fatuous fool! Thou hastest to thy doom.The post thou dream’st of, soon will be thy tomb.His fancy webs of power and fame did weave;Death’s angel thundered: “Come, and all this leave!” 
Arrived betimes at his long journey’s end,The doctor led him to the prince, his friend.Most nobly was he there received in turn.One trims the lampwick, still, to make it burn.The prince addressed him; bade him welcome there;170   Mint-master nam’d him, treasurer, and mayor. 
Our doctor once again his counsel gave:“The damsel to this youth for service leave.United to him, she’ll her health regain;Love’s fever will subside with absence’ pain.” 
The prince bestows the sick one on her mate.United were the two in solemn state.Six months they feasted on love’s joys so sweet;The handmaid’s health from day to day more meet. 
The doctor, now, a potion mixed for him.His health declines; he every day grows slim.   175The coin that passes much from hand to handSoon loses currency, has no demand.So he, when beauty no more graced his cheek,Began to lack worth with the handmaid sleek.All love that’s built on outer skin-deep charms,Is not true love. At length shame ’tis that warms.Would it were shame alone that pricks him now!He’d not been victimised and brought thus low.His eyes pour forth two streams of bitter tears;His altered features the worst foe he fears.   180 
The peacock’s enemy his plumage call.The monarch bleeds whose splendours neighbours gall.The musk-deer for the musk-pod still is slain;His blood for that alone the ground will stain.The marten for its fur is trapped, surprised,And strangled. Kings its pelt have prized.The elephant, sagacious creature, dies,For iv’ry pierced with weapons as he flies. 
“He who slays me for what I leave behind,Reflects not: ‘Blood that’s spilt demands its kind.’   185To-day ’tis I; to-morrow ‘twill be thou;Who’ll be most loser? ’Tis not I, all know. 
The shadow of a wall, ’tis true, is wide;The sun revolves; the shadow’s turn’d aside.The world’s a mountain; all our works, a voice;Our voice goes forth; its echo has no choice.”Reflecting thus, the goldRumi breath’d his last;The handmaid’s love and grief behind her cast. 
A dead mate’s love can never more be shown;190   A dead mate’s voice will never more be known;Love for the living, in the heart and eyes,Will ever spring; the dead no more can rise.One Living is there, death that never knows;Love Him! The life from Him alone still flows,Love Him, whom saints and prophets all have loved;Through whom alone we all have lived and moved.Say not thou canst not to His throne approach;He’s gracious. His rich grace bears no reproach! 
The goldRumi’s death through lethal drugs, be sure,195   Was not from hope, or fear, or baser lure.The doctor kill’d him, not to please our prince;Him some divine suggestion did convince.The story of the child by angel slain Cannot be fully grasped by minds too plain.A saint that acts on Heaven’s high behest,Can never do amiss; ’tis always best.He who can pardon, he may also doom;He’s God’s vicegerent; acts in Heaven’s room.As Ishmaël beneath his father’s knife, 200   Do thou for such a prince lay down thy life; 
Thus may thy soul, in future blessed abode,Muhammed-like, in peace be with thy God.His lovers joyful are, most, when they slayTheir worldly joys with their own hands, as play. 
Our prince took not the goldRumi’s life through lust.Chase such suspicion from thy mind thou must.Imagine not he’d stoop to mortal sin.Can holy saint have tainted heart within?The trial of the fire, and of the flame,Is but to cleanse pure gold from every blame.   205So too, temptation on us all is sent,To part the good from those of bad intent.Had he not acted thus by God’s command,No prince, a wolf he’d been, rav’ning the land.From lust, greed, foul caprice, his soul was free;So did God will, whate’er the cause may be.Elias sank his ship in full design; That wreck to future blessings was the sign.Moses was shock’d thereat, with all his skillAnd inspiration. Thou must needs judge ill.   210A blood-red rose call not by murder’s name;Just retribution see thou do not blame.Had righteous blood been shed by him as naught,Blasphemer were I to extol him aught.Praise of the wicked God with horror views;The good contemn all flatterers of sin’s crews.Our prince was kind and virtuous, wise and just,A man God-fearing, and in God’s full trust.A victim put to death by such a friend,Is slain in error, or for some wise end.   215 
Did not our God mean mercy in His wrath,How could the Lord of Mercies thunder forth?A child may tremble at the lancet’s smart;His mother knows there’s healing in the dart.It may half kill him, but restores sound life;So God’s great mercies far surpass our strife.Men judge of what they see by what they think.219   From judging justice, men of sense will shrink. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





II. The Oilman and the Parrot 
An oilman there was, who a parrot possessed,Soft-voiced, and green-coated; could talk with the best.The oilshop her charge when the man was away;The customers coaxed she the whole live-long day.Her speech was quite human, her words full of sense,In all parrot-tricks she was void of offence. 
One day the man popped out, on bus’ness intent;The parrot, as usual, had charge while he went.A cat, as it chanced, of a mouse in full chaseBounced into the shop. This poor Poll could not face.   5From perch away flew she; took refuge on shelf;Some jars she knocked over; the oil spread itself. 
The master returning, first sat himself down,As lord of the manor; the shop was his own.The oil-pools he spied, and then Polly’s wet coat;A blow on the head made her feathers drop out. 
In silence some days Polly brooded, from grief;The oilman’s bereft of his wits, to be brief.He plucked at his beard; he heaved a deep sigh;“Alas!” then, he shrieked out, “day’s darkened on high   10My hand, would it withered had, ere I’d struck Poll;I’ve silenced her prattle that always was droll!” 
His alms now he showers on each passing scamp,In hopes Poll her chatter ‘d get back by some tramp.Three days and three nights in this guise did he pass,Despair at his heart, like a lorn lovesick lass;Incessantly sobbing and sighing, his wordWas: “Pray now, will speech e’er return to my bird?” 
A bare-headed mendicant happened to pass;15   Whose scalp was close shaved, smooth and shining as glass.At once our Poll-parrot her silence forswore,Screamed after the mendicant: “Poor head! Sore! Sore!Old bald-pate! old bald-pate! What is it thou’st done?Upset some one’s oil jar? The oil is’t all gone?”The passers-by smiled all at Polly’s mistake,‘Tween bald-head and bare-head no diff’rence to make. 
So thou, my dear friend, think thyself not a saint;A quean to a queen bears resemblance, but faint.Mankind on this point in great error still stands;20   Th’ elect of the Lord are ignored on all hands.The equals of prophets acknowledged they be;Of saints they’re the brethren, as all men agree.Fools say: “The elect are but human, you see;To eat and to sleep they’re constrained, just as we.” 
Through blindness they miss the real point of the strife,The diff’rence between them’s immense all through life.The wasp and the bee eat and drink from the fields;The one stings, the other sweet honey still yields.The deer of both sorts browse the same mountain’s side;25   The one gives rich musk; dung the other; go, hide.The canes of two species in one land may grow;Quite empty that one; from this, sugar will flow.By thousands, examples of pairs thus are known,Which differ as much as does cheese from the moon. 
Our bread, in one case, turns to dirt in our meat;Another produces the mind, God’s own seat.His food the one man swells with envy and greed;By like means another gains virtue indeed.One soil is productive; one barren and salt;One angel’s in heaven; the other’s at fault.   30In form, many pairs may appear as though one,Clear water is sometimes as hard as a stone.Excepting the taster by practice, who knowsThe wholesome from unwholesome water that flows? 
Supposing saints’ miracles tricks, magic-wrought,They fancy them both the result of deep thought.Magicians, at bidding of Pharaoh, did castTheir wands down, to Moses’ rod as a repast.From his rod to their wands a chasm there must be;From his act to theirs we an interval see.   35God’s curse on their witchcraft and devilish art!His blessing on Moses, who chose the best part! 
To me, like as apes are man’s miscreants all; To speak of them causes me, straight, sick to fall!Whatever men practise, apes will copy still;Our actions they mimic; of thought they know nil.They cunningly do what they’ve seen that man did;The reason they seek not; from them that is hid.A man acts from reason; an ape from mere whim.Perdition may seize all such actors, and him!   40The hypocrite worships as aping the saint,For form’s sake, or worse. His religion’s mere feint. 
In pilgrimage, worship, and fasting, and alms, Believers and hypocrites vie, as in psalms.Believers shall win in the last judgment day;The hypocrites then shall receive their due pay.The two are contending one great game of deeds,As factions of Mervites and Rāzites with creeds.They each shall go there, where their party shall stand;45   And each shall be classed as their actions demand. 
Just style these “Believers,” their hearts fill with glee;But dub them all “Hypocrites,” rage then thou’lt see.The first one’s ashamed of the last one’s true self;This last-named’s a plague to the first, like an elf. 
No virtue in mere words or letters is found;“Believer” ‘s a word in itself but a sound.If “Hypocrite!” cast in their teeth be at last,As scorpion’s sting to their souls it clings fast.If “Hypocrite” ‘s name be not product of hell,50   So bitter at all times why does its sound tell?This name’s great repulsion is not in its form;The bitter it smacks of is not from a corm.The word’s but a vase; ’tis its sense is the wine;The sense of a book in the title may shine. 
Sweet lakes and salt seas do we find here on earth;The barrier between them: “Thus far; go not forth!” 
They both, in their origin, flow from one source;Look not at their severance; it’s matter of course.The touchstone’s the test by the which thou must tryIf gold be quite pure, or debased with alloy.   55The touchstone of conscience, where planted by God,What’s certain, what’s doubtful, makes plain without nod.A fishbone that sticks in the throat of a manNo ease ever gives till it’s coughed out again.In ten thousand mouthfuls should one bone be found,As soon as perceived, it’s spit out on the ground. 
Perception of things mundane guides here below;Religion’s keen sense leads where God’s glories glow.The health of his senses man asks of the leech;Religion’s sound sense from the Lord we beseech.   60For healthy perceptions, our frame must be sound;Religion’s enjoyments through suff’rings are found.The health of the soul’s through a waste of the flesh,But after much searching it builds up afresh. 
How blest is the soul that, for love of its God, Has flung away wealth, health, e’en life, as a sod!Has pulled down its house a hid treasure to find,And built it again from that treasure refined!Who cuts off the streamlet to clear out its bed;Then turns on the water with which it is fed!   65Who gashes his skin to extract the spear-head!(The skin may now heal, for the irritant’s fled.)Who wrecks a strong castle to drive out the foe,Then rears it still stronger, to hold evermo’! 
The will of Almighty God who shall control?These sentences written are parables all. 
Sometimes in one way, in another sometimes,Religion confuses before it sublimes.Not terror, bewilderment, loathing, dismay;70   But ecstacy, rapture, love, come into play.In trance of love fixed, one contemplates the Lord,Another, self losing, unites with his God.Observe the rapt features of that one, of this;Perchance by such watching thy soul may gain bliss. 
Too numerous demons in human form walk;Beware, then, with whom thou engagest in talk.The fowler his whistle may ply in the field,To lure the poor birds, saying: “Come and be killed.”Each songster conceives ’tis the voice of its mate,75   Descends from the air, and meets with its fate.The sinner, in pious cant, uses a wile,To trap the unwary who ponders no guile.The upright deal faithfully, truly, in trust;The wicked imagine but fraud and distrust.A lion of wool is a beggar’s device; Musaylama’s named Muhammed in a trice. Musaylama liar, deceiver we know,Muhammed was faithful in weal and in woe.The wine of God’s love was the food of his soul.80   The wine that inebriates dash from thy bowl. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





III. The Jewish King, Persecutor of the Christians 
A certain Jewish King, in savage, brutal scenes,From hate of Jesus, persecuted Nazarenes.’Twas Jesu’s age, when he the Gospel first did teach;In Jesus, Moses, and in Moses, Jesus preach. 
That King God made squint-eyed; things straight he could not see.A King and squint-eyed? Ah! that one the two should be! 
A master once a squint-eyed slave commanded so:“Come here; that bottle from its shelf, go, fetch me; go.”The squint-eye straightway asked: “Which, master, of the two? The case explain; clear up the doubt, and truly show.”   5His master answered: “Two there’s not; there is but one;Put off thy strabism; with stupidity have done.”“Good master,” quoth he, “chide me not; ’tis nature’s fault.”The master quick rejoined: “Look now; break one; halt! halt!”As soon as one was broken, both were gone from sight.Poor squint-eye nearly lost his wits in childish fright. 
There was but one; his eyes were cause that he saw two.The one away, the other consequently was gone too. 
Desire or rage, at times, makes people double see.10   The mind’s distortion brings the eyes perverse to be.From passion’s mists our reason ever blinded lies.The heart its clouds sends up; the mind’s eye’s vision flies.The judge to taking bribes who basely bends himself,Can never well discern the right and wrong, from pelf.Our King through Israelitish rancour grew so blind,A s nothing to distinguish in his rage of mind.By thousands, faithful seekers of God’s will he slew.“Vouchsafe us help, O God of Moses, Jesus too!” 
He had a Vazīr, brigandlike for craft and force.15   In knavish stratagems he had no peer; of course.He whispered to the King: “These Christians, as in hives,All keep their faith a mystery, to save their lives.To kill them thus is profitless. Give breathing-time,Religion can’t be smelt out just like musk or thyme.A secret ’tis, well wrapped in many folds of guile.In outward show, as friends, perfidiously they smile.”The King, with grimace fierce: “What have we then to do?What remedy proposest thou to make them rue?I will not leave alive one Christian in the land,20   Whose faith is shown to all, or in his bosom banned.” 
The Vazīr to him: “King, my hands and ears cut off;My nose and lips the same. Give orders; let them scoff.Unto the gallows send me; I’ll of all be seen.Then let an intercessor plead, — some prince, — your queen.Let all this happen where some spacious public placeMay let all see, that all may know of my disgrace. 
Then drive me forth; away from thee in exile sent;And they’ll receive me, under feint of sorrow bent.‘In secret,’ I’ll pretend, ‘a Christian I’m at heart;Call God to witness how my faith has worked my hurt.   25The King a knowledge gained of zeal in me that burned;Its flame to put out quite, his anger on me turned.I strove to hide my faith, my leaning to keep hid;Affected still to be, think, act, just as he bid.Suspicion crossed his mind; my secret he espied;All I could plead for nothing went; he said I lied.“Thy specious words,” quoth he, “are needles in a loaf; My eye, as through a glass, sees all thy thoughts; thou oaf!No curtain of thy trickeries can veil thy faith from me;I’m proof against thy knaveries; thy cunning I can see.”   30Were not the faith of Jesus the refuge of my heart,He’d not have mutilated me in this sad sort.For love of Jesus, head and life I will lay down;All persecution suffer to gain a martyr’s crown.My life I will not grudge to lose for Jesus’ sake.His faith I hold from point to point without mistake.I dread his doctrine’s fall to uninstructed guides.The truth from their bad teaching still to ruin glides.Thanks be to God, to Jesus thanks, who me have madeA teacher perfect of the faith so free from shade.   35The Jew and Judaism I have forsworn in sooth;About my loins the sacred cord I wear; ’tis truth.This age the age of Jesus is; O men, give ear!His doctrine take to heart; nought else have you to fear.” 
The Vazīr having laid this plot before the King,All shame and scruple vanished; ’twas a perfect thing. 
In presence of the public, nose, ears were cut off.The rabble wondered greatly; now’s the time to scoff.He fled unto the Christians; begged them him to hear;40   And straightway set up preaching; saintlike was he there. 
The Christians soon with one accord accepted him,In multitudes they round him flocked, all meek and prim.The Gospel’s holy words, the prayer, the cord, he’d preach;The mysteries of all of these to them he’d teach.To outward view a guide to sanctity was he;In very truth, a trap and fowler’s whistle; see.Of such effect his wiles, disciples were deceived;From Jesu’s teaching fell, and in this cheat believed.It is so. Often does the flesh, for selfish end,45   Intrude itself across the soul’s most fervent trend.Meek virtue was not what they sought to gain the most;Of him they learned to ferret out new sins, and boast.Hair-splitting casuists, point by point they sin dissect;They grow too wise; ‘twixt rose and garlic links detect.Of such avail’s the subtle cunning of these men,That honest teachers oft are made to swerve by them. 
The Christian folk in him their confidence thus place.Gregarious, like sheep, ‘s the mob of every race.A gen’ral favourite was he; all loved him well;50   Christ’s vicar called they him; as who the truth could tell.This cursed Antichrist, so full of fraud and wile!Grant help, O God! ’Tis Thou alone canst curb such guile.The devil’s snares are spread abroad in tempting guise,Their baits are various; we, like birds, shut fast our eyes.If saved from one, another tempts; we thither stray;Like hawks and eagles, heinous sins make us their prey.Thou shieldest us, O gracious God! But ever still,With froward hearts and minds we counteract Thy will. 
This world’s a granary, of which we steal the corn.The wheat is there all garnered; we it spoil in scorn.   55We take no heed of future life in what we do;Sly mice still help us to consume the fruits that grow,Those mice a road have found to reach our winter store.Through their inroads our victual spoils; it is no more.First stop mouse-holes; make safe thy granary, O man!Thy wheat then garner safely; winter’s at our van. 
Give ear to what he’s said, the Lord’s own Chief of Chiefs: “No perfect worship’s needed, save in war’s reliefs.” If mice there be not to destroy our garnered meeds,Where is our wheat, the fruit of fifty summers’ deeds?   60To shreds all nibbled lie the products of our days;No stores accumulate for provend on our ways. 
How many sparks of fire from flint and steel have flown!How many hearts, like tinder, make those sparks their own!But in the dark some thief his finger presses there;And ev’ry train puts out that has been lighted here.Extinguished if those sparks were not, a flame would rise;A burning light be kindled, flashing ‘yond the skies.A thousand snares are laid to catch our tripping feet;But, Lord, if us Thou shield, harm never shall us meet.   65If but Thy grace will guide us, lead us on our way,No thief can steal our peace of mind, our light of day. 
Each night Thou settest free the soul from trap of flesh,To scan and learn the hidden records of Thy wish. Each night the soul is like a bird from cage set free,To wander. Judge and judgment, then, it does not see.By night the pris’ner loses sense of bars, of chains;By night the monarch knows no state, no pomp retains; 
The merchant counts no more, in sleep, his gains and loss;70   The prince and peasant, equal, on their couches toss. 
The Gnostic is so e’en by day, when wide awake;For God hath said: “Let quietude care of him take.” Asleep to all the things of earth by night, by day,As pen in writer’s hand he doth his guide obey.Whoever sees not in the lines the writer’s hand,May fancy ’tis the pen alone has all command.Of this, the Gnostic’s privilege, a trace ‘d sufficeTo rob of sleep and reason vulgar souls of ice.His spirit wanders in the groves of th’ absolute.75   His soul is easy; body, still, calm, quiet, mute.The two absolved from greed, lust, sense, care, fear also;Each, like a bird uncaged, is free; roams to and fro. Should he, bird-like, be whistled back to trap of sense,Again he sinks, the slave of every vile pretence. 
When light of dawn paints bright the blushing sky with red,Ere orb of day comes forth as bridegroom from his bed,Shrill chanticleer, as though it were last judgment’s trump,Calls back to consciousness the sleepers. Up they jump.The souls return their bodies to inhabit, then;80   Each body fraught with thoughts, and words, and deeds again. 
The soul turned loose, without the body’s cares or ken,Attests the truth: “Sleep is death’s brother,” to all men.But lest-it should escape, and not come back at call,A tether to it’s bound; it’s not quite free withal. 
It must come back by day from roaming where it wills,The cares of life to bear; — a burthen that soon kills.O! Would, O God, Thou’d keep my soul in Thy own hand,As Sleepers in the Grotto; Noah’s ark once to land!Then had I ‘scaped the tempest waking thoughts aye raise;My mind, eyes, ears, had rested; all my task Thy praise!   85Sev’n Sleepers? — Many are there of them in this world,Before, behind me, right and left; they’re round me hurl’d!My “Cave” art Thou; my “Mate” art Thou; O God, my friend!Men’s eyes and ears are sealed; they know not where they wend. 
A Caliph asked of Laylà: “Art thou really sheFor whom poor Majnūn went distracted? For I see,Than other beauties thou art not so passing fair.”Said she: “Be silent; Thou’rt not Majnūn; nor his pair.” 
A man awake is sound asleep; more, he can’t be.His watchfulness is worse than sleep; how should he see?   90Our souls, if not awake to God’s most holy truth,Are not awake. We’re slaves to them. The greater ruth!The soul all day is buffeted by fancy’s whims;Of loss or profit, life or death, as frenzy swims.No peace enjoyed; no dignity remains in hand;No vigour to attempt a flight to heaven’s strand.Asleep is he who’s slave to every sordid wish;Who begs of fancy; parleys with it, even. Pish! 
A demon in his sleep he sees; an angel deems. Through lust he swoons with sensual pleasure as he dreams.   95 
His seed he sows in sandy, salt, and desert land;And wakes to find no harvest’s ripened to his hand.A headache, with a beating heart, is all he feels;“Alas!” he sobs, “that treach’rous gnome! My whole frame reels!” 
A bird flies in the air; its shadow flits on earth;A second bird it seems to be, though nothing worth.Some simpleton runs after it; to catch it tries;Himself tires out; meanwhile the creature safely flies.The fool still knows not ’tis a shadow he pursues.100   Its substance where to seek he has no power to muse.He shoots his arrows at the fleeting, mocking shade;His quiver emptied, he returns; no booty made. 
Our life’s our quiver. When our years are vainly spentIn chasing phantoms, grief will one day have its vent.Let God’s protection mercifully on us rest,All fancies and all phantoms stand at once confest.God’s servants are His shadows here below on earth;To this world dead, but living in a second birth.To their skirts cling; from them thy soul’s nutrition seek.105   So may’st thou ‘scape the perils of this scene’s last week.The holy text of: “How He stretcheth forth the shade!” Of saints gives notice. Them his glory doth pervade.Without their guidance venture not to thread this maze;Like Ab’ram answer: “Fading things do not me please!” In days of trouble, consolation’s sun seek out.The skirts of “Tebrīz’ Sun” will wipe out care, no doubt. Know’st not the road to that good man, and grief survene?Inquire of his and my friend, great Husāmu-’d-Dīn. 
While on thy way, should envy seize thee by the throat,110   Know, Satan’s sin was envy; malice made him gloat. 
He envied Adam’s rise to such sublime estate.He wars with all who’re good, through envy and through hate.No mountain-pass as this life’s progress is so steep;Let envy not increase thy load; thou canst but creep.The flesh a hot-bed is of envy and of strife.These soil the soul; for envy’s bane of mortal life.Should envy seek thy soul to kill, invoke the Lord,The God of mercy thee can save, with His true Word.“Make clean My house, ye two,” did Ab’ram’s God once say. His house our frame; a house of glory, though of clay.   115Should envy fill thy breast ‘gainst one that envies not,Foul stains ensue; thy heart’s impure; all good’s forgot.Prostrate thyself, then, at the feet of holy men;Cast dust upon thy head, God’s pardon to attain. 
The Vazīr of our Jewish king was envy’s self;His nose and ears he sacrificed, as ‘twere but pelf,In hopes the sting of envy ‘d find an easy way,To pour the selfsame wounds he ‘d open lay.His nose, from envy, in the air, who carries high,His ears and nose to envy ‘d give without a sigh.   120The nose the organ is by which we trace a scent;The scent then guides to where the odour finds its vent.Who has no sense of smell is truly minus nose,Its odour we should trace to where religion blows.To scent religion’s fragrance, not returning thanks,Ingratitude is. Nose to lose merit such pranks.Be grateful, thou; and venerate all grateful men;Abase thyself; a champion be of theirs. Amen.Be not a cut-throat, like that Vazīr, of men’s faith;Seek not to turn believing souls from what God saith.   125 
That Vazīr seemed a pastor of the truth, in sham;As one who bitter aloes mixed in sweet plum jam. 
Some men of sense discernment used, his ways to scan,His honied phrases smacked to them of knavish plan.Refined truisms, double-meaning, he’d deal out,Like syrup into which some mortal poison’s put. 
Be thou not caught with knavery’s fairly-spoken word;A hidden meaning it may have. Be on thy guard.Of evil-minded men the speech is never good;130   Their hearts are dead and putrid; life cannot there brood.A man’s an offset from a man, by nature’s law,As sure as cake of bread is bread, and not mere straw. 
God’s Lion, ‘Alī, saith: “All words in folly made,As weeds on dunghills, crowd apace; as quickly fade.” He who would rashly, thoughtlessly, repose thereon,Begrimed will be, befouled, befooled, and spat upon.He that gives vent to wind, mere wind, is bound to wash;His worship else is vain; pollution doth it quash. 
The Vazīr’s talk was all: “Be diligent in pray’r.”135   His acts proclaimed aloud: “Of duty never care.” 
In surface silver’s white and glittering to the eye;With friction, hands and purse it soils, though e’er so dry.A fire is jocund to the view; its flame may please.But venture not too near it; black is its surcease.The lightning flashes brightly, shining as it fliesBut oft, alas, it strikes man blind, or dead he lies. 
Be wise betimes; for “he that’s void of common sense,Is like the ox with yoke on neck.” So ‘Alī, — Hence! 
For six years was the Vazīr absent from the king;Disciple seemed of Jesu’s faith; bad news to bring.   140Their hearts and faith the people all pinned on to him;At his command they every one would change each whim.His purpose all the time was fraud and gross deceit;He pondered naught but wiles, to compass their defeat.By secret message, with the king he held converse.The king to him fair gratulations sent, diverse. 
A missive came to him at length: “My faithful son,’Tis time my heart was set at rest. What hast thou done?”His answer was: “The thing’s prepared; have patience yet;The Christian folk to puzzle soon, we’ll not forget.”   145 
The Christians portioned were, for purposes of war,In legions twelve; to each, a captain void of fear.The men of every legion to their captain boundBy ties of trust and confidence, in each heart found.These legions and those captains twelve, to that bad manHad yielded up their every thought; — as mankind can.Should he command to die, not one of them would failTo give his life right joyfully, — without one wail. 
A volume he prepared in name of each of them;The matter of these registers not all the same.   150The style of every one was in a different guise;From end to end each book’s contents were forgeries.In one, the pangs of hunger mortified the flesh;With penitence, with fasting made, and prayer, to clash.A second taught that fasting did no good at all;That charity, beneficence, was all in all. 
A third explained: “Thy fasting, — charity itself,-Syntheism is. With God, thou deifiest thyself.To trust with resignation ‘s all religion’s plan.155   In weal and woe are springs to trap the soul of man.”A fourth declared: “Faith without works is truly dead.Alone is service valued; faith’s a sin to dread.”A fifth laid down: “The Law’s commands and warnings allAre not for practice; they’re mere symbols of man’s fall.By showing us man’s weakness, God is made more strong;The decalogue this purpose serves; the rest’s all wrong.”The sixth, again: “For man to talk of weakness here,Ingratitude is, simply; God’s grace is so clear;Think, now, how wonderful is man; how great; how wise;160   ’Tis God has made him thus; to thank Him in us lies.”A seventh suggests: “Leave power and weakness unto Me;They’re idols, both, as also are all things ye see.”An eighth contends: “Put not thy light behind a shade.Let all men see thy light; to glad their eyes ’twas made.Removed from sight if ’tis, an evil thence will loom.Thou, too, wilt be removed at midnight from the groom.”A ninth expounds: “Put out the light; thou’lt have more joy.The sense of sight is one: joy’s feelings, many; boy.Put out the light. The sense of touch thou may’st then use.165   The bride is timid; in the dark she’ll not refuse.Renunciation of the world’s a very farce.Renounce. The world, and more, thou’lt dream of in thy trance.”A tenth assures: “That which the Lord hath given to man,God hath made pleasant to the eyes. Deny, who can. 
Take what is thine. Avert thee not; ’tis folly stillTo take to groaning, moaning, when all’s at thy will.”Another yet: “Forsake all things thou hast possessed.Retention of them by thee baseness is, confessed.How many roads diverse traced for their feet men deem;Each one to one sole “church” the only road doth seem.   170If way there were secure, for hitting out the truth,The Jews and Magi surely ‘d not missed it, forsooth.”Again another: “Moral food makes heart to live.We see this clearly; every hour a proof doth give.Enjoyments sensuous, fleshly, when to fade they haste,Leave no result behind; they’re desert mirage, waste.Regret’s their only issue, grief for loss of time;A bankrupt’s stock; their commerce gives no gain, no prime.Pursuit of them has never ended in success;Dire failure still must be the fruit of recklessness.   175Distinguish thou betimes the foolish from the wise;The end of each scan well; ’tis there the difference lies.”And still one more: “True wisdom strive thou to find out.True wisdom’s not the fruit of noble birth. Poor lout!Each ‘church’ has had in view to gain a happy end.But one and all have failed and could but fail. God send!To palm off jugglers’ tricks is not true wisdom’s part,Or man had never seen so many faiths take start.”And one again: “True wisdom thou hast surely found.Thou knowest men of wisdom; — wisdom’s safest ground.   180Be manful. Let not men by fraud make mock of thee.Thy own path choose; turn not from it for aught thou see.”To one he said: “Thy unity is all in all;Besides thee, aught existence never had, nor shall.”One volume taught: “The universe is unity.Who teaches two exist, is but a squint-eye, he.”The last gave out: “A hundred really are but one.”Unless a madman, whom could have such doctrines won? 
In them these paradoxes fitly found their place,185   In words and sense his doctrines lacked all claim to grace.Each volume was the antithesis of the next;If one was honey, poison was the other’s text.Wouldst thou escape his honey and his poison too,Forsake thou not the holy word of scripture true. 
Twelve volumes thus were writ with fraudulent research,By that Vazīr, the hidden foe of Jesu’s church.Jesu’s one-mindedness for him had no perfume;The wine of Jesu’s jar no bouquet to his grume.A many-coloured garment washed in that pure wine,190   As snowy white comes out, and clear as is sunshine.Not faded or plain-coloured, such as gives offence;But clear as crystal water, in which fishes glance.Dry land, chameleon-like, gay-coloured scenes displays;But fishes dry land shun; they love clear water’s sprays. 
What is the fish, and what the water, in my tale,That they should symbolise God’s kingdom on small scale?Whole shoals of fishes, great and small, the water’s realm,In adoration mute, with praise to God o’erwhelm. 
What showers of bounty from God’s outstretched hand195   Have made the seas with pearls of price to deck the strand!What brilliant suns of brightest goodness must have shone,Ere clouds and sea could have produced the matchless stone! What rays of wisdom poured on water and on landEre earth could nourish seed, yield corn to our demand!The earth, a faithful trustee, gives back what we sow,No fraud, embezzlement, in its trust do we know. 
. 
This faithfulness to trust arises, with time’s run,From generous warmth infused by glow of justice’ sun.Whene’er God’s symbol quickening summer back doth bring,The mysteries of the earth straight from her bosom spring.Th’ All-Bountiful, who gave to senseless earth, of grace,This faithfulness, trustworthiness, in every place,   200In mercy plans forth inorganic matter’s course.In wrathful wisdom’s counsel blinds man to its source.Our hearts and souls have not the grace to understand.To whom address me? Not one ear’s at my command!Who lends his ear, shall also quickly find an eye.Whose ear’s, like stone, to counsel deaf, shall surely die. 
Of wond’rous power is God possessed. What’s magic’s skill!Miraculous works He enacts. Where’s witchery’s spell!To sing His praise in me a want of feeling shows.It proves I breathe. To breathe, to live, breaks true love’s laws.   205In His existence let my being sink, quite lost.To be, is to be blind and blear-eyed at the most.If blind I were not, swooned, unconscious should I be.The Sun of Glory’s might and power then could I see.Were not my sight grown blear, through weeping in my dreams,Had I stood, ice-like, frozen, ‘neath His mercy’s beams? 
Just like his king, this Vazīr was shortsighted seen.The Ancient, ’twas, of Days, he wrestled ‘gainst, I ween.Th’ Almighty One, who with one breath, one word, did bringTen thousand worlds from naught to join in being’s ring.   210 
Ten thousand worlds, besides, disclose themselves to sight,If thou direct thy vision towards the God of Light. 
In man’s esteem the world is vast, without an end;With Power Infinite compared, a grain of sand.The world’s around the soul a dismal prison-den.Arise! Escape! Regain the fields at large! Be men!The world is finite; He is infinite. Confide!Earth’s forms and qualities God’s essence from us hide. 
The million spears of Pharaoh, vaunting in his might,215   By Moses’ wand were broken in th’ appointed night.And many sons of skill, for healing science famed,By Jesu’s curing halt, lame, blind, deaf, mad, were shamed.How many poets, orators, great men of note,By word of the Illiterate One were shown to dote.For love of our Almighty God, the Lord of all,Who would not die, a stock, a block, we needs must call.Dead heart of stone if He but touch with love’s live coal,A magnet straight becomes, no longer quits the pole. Plume not thyself as one endowed with cunning guile;220   The meek more surely draw rich gifts from Heaven’s smile. 
How many treasure-hiders, treasure-seekers, here,Have been derided, laughed to scorn, by that All-Seer!What art thou, man? Canst thou in thought with Him compare?What’s the whole earth? A blade of grass, His might to dare? 
A woman, once, through foul adultery’s sin estranged,By God, in punishment, to Venus’ star was changed. From woman into Venus? Sure, that change was sad.To dust and ashes turn. Less shame in this. Art mad? 
Thy soul it is must lift thee to heaven’s highest home;The flesh can but consign thee deep to hell’s dark dome.   225Thyself it is that dooms thee to that woful fate;The angels’ envy art thou, here, in man’s estate.Consider, then, this doom; revolve it in thy mind;That woman’s change, compared with this, was joy, thou’lt find. 
To push ambition’s course beyond the stars thou’st sought?Refused hast thou first Adam to adore, as naught? But seed of Adam art thou, O degenerate manWhy wilt thou then as glory count dark shame’s foul ban?Why proudly vaunt thou’lt conquer all this teeming earth?Why fondly fancy rumour ‘ll sound thy passing worth?   230 
Should winter’s snow in heaps encumber all earth’s soil,One gleam of summer’s sun the frigid cloak will foil.So, too, that Vazīr’s scheme of fraud, nor his alone,Reduced to nothing was by one word from God’s throne. 
Such crafty wiles as these He changes into weal;As poisons by His power receive the gift to heal.What doubtful was, becomes confest, at His decree;True love springs up, where hatred plotted was to be.He safely carries through the fire His chosen friend; The fear of death He maketh peace of mind to lend.   235Through Him are treasures hid beneath the ruin’s waste;Thorns roses yield; our bodies joys of soul foretaste.By workings of the pang of love for Him I burn;Though sophistlike I rave, ’tis unto Him I turn. 
Another stratagem the Vazīr next conceived;From public life withdrew, and solitude achieved. 
Admiring followers all were fain to mourn his loss;For forty days, and more, in cell he bore his cross.Their yearning for him grew more fierce from day to day;240   They missed his good example, words, and zeal to pray.They grieved that he in solitude should vex his flesh;Their sympathies clung round him every day afresh.“Without our teacher we’re a pastorless poor flock;Blind beggars without staff to guide us to our nook.For mercy’s sake, for love of God, have pity now;No longer us deprive of consolation’s show.We’re infants all, and thou our feeder, tutor thou,Protection shed around; forsake us not just now.” 
His answer was: “My spirit’s present with you, friends.245   But issue from this hermitage my power transcends.”The captains twelve, of legions, intercession made;His grieved disciples raised a wail, a serenade:“Great evil’s lighted on us! Ah! Beloved One!We’re orphans made; our parent, thou, away art gone!Raise not such pretext; push us not to our wit’s end.We sob and sigh; we beat our breasts. Do comfort send!Thou’st pampered, spoilt us with thy wondrous eloquence;With doctrine from thy lips our souls cannot dispense.Torment us not, for God’s sake! Pity on us take!250   Be kind! This day, ‘To-morrow’ say not; to us wake!Our hearts are rapt in thee; no heart in us remains.Heartless and spiritless are we, poor bankrupt swains!Like fishes out of water, so we writhe and gasp.The dam break down; let flow the stream; avert death’s grasp!Thou art the very paragon, the phœnix of the age.Heaven’s mercy, save us; or, we perish, we enrage!” 
To them he thus: “O men of little sense, take heed;You foolishly are seeking elsewhere what you need. 
Your ears stop up with wool; list not to speech of man;The mote that blinds your eyes cast out. Then, see you can.   255With cotton in your outward ears, you’ll plainly hearThe still small voice of conscience, drowned now by your fear.All outward sense discard; all thought, reflection flee;And straight you’ll hear, within, God’s voice: ‘Come unto Me.’So long as with chit-chat you keep yourselves awake,Communion with the angels you in sleep forsake.Our words and acts make up our outward habitudes;Our inward man’s our converse with infinitudes.Our senses barren are; they come of barren soil;Our soul, like Jesus, walks the sea without turmoil.   260Our outer man’s a barren wilderness, I ween;The inner man, ’tis, sounds the depths of the Unseen.If all our life be spent in chase of mundane things,Our paths must lead o’er wastes, o’er hills, o’er ocean springs.The Fount of Life, where shall we find in such a course?Death’s billows how avoid, and how escape remorse?The desert’s moving sandhills are our schemes and plans.Life-rills are abnegation, self-denial, man’s.” 
Him answered his disciples: “Master, grieve us not.Fresh sorrow, through pretences, add not to our lot.   265Such heavy burden to endure we’ve not the power.Poor suffering weaklings we, in sad affliction’s hour.The heavens appear to raise themselves all vastly high;But true sublimity’s God’s attribute. We sigh.The food of every bird He gives in providenceHe says whose figs devoured shall be these ten days hence. 
Who ‘d give, in lieu of mother’s milk, to infants, bread,Would kill them with improper food before them spread.But when their teeth are grown, and deck their little mouths,270   Themselves will ask for bread; milk suits not then their growths.The unfledged chick is yet for flight all unpreparedAttempting it, he falls a prey to puss, poor birdHis wings well pinioned, he soars high in breezy air;Needs no encouragement; his instinct leads him there.Each howling imp is stilled at sound of thy sole voice;And words from thee are utmost joy to all our race.Our ears are gladdened as they catch thy tongue’s converse,Each desert grows a garden, when thou’rt freshness’ source.With thee amongst us, earth a foretaste gives of heaven,275   Thou’rt our delight, from morn to eve our longed-for leaven.Without thee, day’s refulgence we cannot employ,If thou art present, every care is turned to joy.High station, true, may be attained by charlatan;But moral worth alone gives eminence to man.” 
To them, now, he replied: “Your prayer ‘s of no avail.My counsel take and ponder. Naught else shall prevail.If I’m a trusted man, my word is not a lie,E’en though I’d say that black is white, or earth is sky.If I’m perfection, who the perfect’s word denies?280   If I am otherwise, why all this fuss and noise?Forth from my solitude to come I’m not designed.I’m communing with God; to His will I’m resigned.” 
They still insisted: “Vazīr, that we’ll not deny,But our remonstrance is a truly piteous cry.We weep our eyes out through our grief thee not to see,With sighs our hearts burst, vainly looking out for thee. 
An infant quarrels not with its attentive nurse;And yet it weeps, through knowing not what’s good from worse.We are thy harps. The plectrum’s stroke. is from thy hand.’Tis thus we moan; smit by thy cunning harpist wand.   285Like flutes of reed, our utterances are through thee found;Or mountain vale, our echo’s but child of thy sound.Or as chess-players, striving in their dubious game;Our ‘check’ and ‘mate’ are from thee, man of mighty name.What are we, — can we be? ’Tis thou’rt our life of life,So long as thou’rt among us. If not, all is strife.We’re naught; — we’re nothings. All our being is in thee.Existence’ very self by thy frail form we see.We’re lions, true; but stand on vanes of weathercocks,Our twists and twirls, our starts, our jumps, are from wind’s shocks.   290These lions’ movements are in sight; the winds unseen.The Great Unseen, th’ Almighty One, ‘s behind the screen.Our moving wind, our very being from thee springs.Existence, else, were vain, not sheltered ‘neath thy wings.’Tis thou hast taught us, nothings, valued life to prize;’Twas thou that made us, erring, lovers of th’ Allwise.Take not from us the savour sweet of thy good gifts,Thy cup, thy wine, thy relish, absence from us lifts.But shouldst thou still refuse, who to repine ‘d have heart?Can pictures of the painter’s hand complain, and art?   295No notice of us take; from us avert thy face;But ne’er deride the claims of thy prevailing grace.We were not; prayers from us arose not to thy ear;Thy grace alone ’twas sought us out; thou drewest near.Before the artist and his brush, the picture’s null;Like unborn babe in mother’s womb, till time be full.Before almighty power creation stands in wait,As canvas ‘fore the needle ‘broiderer’s hand may mate. 
A demon here, an angel there, or man, is bid300   To be; now joy, now sorrow, rises up amid.We have no hand to move; defend ourselves we can’t.We have no breath, no speech to pray for aid in want.” 
The Qur’ān ponder this my verse to understand. There God hath said: “Thou threwst not, when thou threwst” the sand. Although we shoot an arrow swiftly to its mark,The bow, the arrow, we ourselves, are from God’s ark.There’s no compulsion here, though God can all compel.’Tis not complaint, if I of God’s compulsion tell.305   All our complaints of our felt needs are indices.If shame we feel, of our freewill a sign it is.Without choice were we, there ‘d be no pretext for shame.Why blush and hang the head, cast down the eyes so tame?What doth a master in disciple always chide?Why teacheth he in Providence still to confide?Shouldst thou assert God carelessly makes us to act, — That sun of verity He hides in mists of fact, — An answer I will give, — just lend thy ear to me;Forsake all blasphemy, — of God’s faith ever be:310   “The longings, the regrets, that every sick man feels,Awakings are of conscience. Sickness this reveals.The moment man is ailing, — prisoner to bed sent,He counts his sins, he asks for grace, vows to repent.He sees the wickedness of all he’s said and done;He promises, in future, errant ways to shun.‘If but I’m spared,’ he says, ‘I never will sin more;I’ll righteousness ensue, all trespasses abjure.’By this thou seest that sickness is not all an ill.’Tis but a time for waking conscience good to will. 
Know then the aphorism, O seeker after truth, — Whoe’er thou be, to whom scent of it may give ruth:   315‘The man that’s most awake, with most of pain will reel;The more his conscience pricks, more sorely sad he’ll feel!’If thou wert really conscious God ’tis thee compels.What need to feel ashamed; — to utter frightful yells?Thou art not so; thou feelest not a captive’s chain;Thou know’st thou’rt free to act, or from each act abstain.Whoever saw a captive sporting in his bonds?Whoever heard of prisoners acting vagabonds?Hast thou had fetters fastened on to both thy feet?Hast e’er beheld kings’ guardsmen resting in thy seat?   320Then be not thou to others hard as jailer man.Obduracy befits not him a king may ban.Compulsion since thou feel’st not, make it not pretext.Say’st that thou feel’st it? Where’s the proof? Show us it next.In every act to which thou inclination hast,Thou know’st thyself free agent: what thou willst, thou dost.If any case arise thy will, thy wish, to brave,Straightway compulsionist thou art: ‘God so would have.’” 
The prophets were compulsionists to this world’s string.Miscreants are compulsionists towards heaven’s King.   325The prophets chose the better part, futurity;The foolish choose the worse, the world’s fatuity.Each bird will flock with birds of its own feather still;The cock well knows his mate, and follows where she will.Miscreants are the brood of hell, to which they go;The goods of worldly life they choose. Then be it so.The prophets are of race from heaven deriving birth;To heaven they tend with heart and soul while here on earth. 
’Twould never end the branches of this theme to count.330   So let us sip again from our old story’s fount. 
Within his cell ensconced, the Vazīr answer gave:“Disciples mine, my firm resolve from me receive.To me a very strict commandment Jesus spake:‘From friends and kin of every class seclusion seek.Thy face set tow’rds a wall; sit in some cell apart,Forsake thyself; forgetfulness cast o’er thy heart.’Permission’s thus denied with men to hold discourse.I’ve naught to say; with mortals more I’ll not converse.Good-bye, my friends! Adieu! You’ll never see me more,335   My journey’s unto heaven; there I’ve laid my store.Th’ empyrean beneath, so long as I have strayed,Like firewood in a furnace have I wept; still prayed.Henceforward I shall sit on Jesu’s own right hand,In highest heaven enthroned, blest Paradise’s strand.” 
The legion-captains now he called to him apart;But one by one, in secret, counsels to impart.To ev’ry one he said: “Successor thee I name,The faith of Jesus to uphold and keep from shame.All other captains thy commands will have to hear;340   ’Tis Jesus thus appoints thee others’ loads to bear.Should any one against thee neck rebellious raise,Him kill, imprison, or in exile end his days.But while I live divulge not what to thee I’ve told,Keep secret till my death this charge thou hast to hold.Let no one know till then ’tis thou art chosen out,Proclaim not thou thyself a king or prince devout.Behold this scroll; take, study it; thyself instruct,’Tis Jesu’s doctrine pure; from this His Church construct.” 
Thus one by one their minds prepared were to be chief:345   “’Tis thou’rt the chosen one; all else would be a thief.” 
He named them each successor; made them so to feel.Whate’er he told to one, to each did he reveal.He gave to each a volume, writ from end to end;No two alike; each different, and hard to blend. Their doctrines various, of every changing hue;Diverse in sense, as objects’ forms exposed to view.Their precepts and commands a very maze of guile,Their sentiments impossible to reconcile. 
The Vazīr now delayed another forty days;Then slew himself, — set free his soul from earth’s affrays.   350The people, hearing of his death, were sorely grieved;Around his corpse collected; eyes, ears, scarce believed.With many bitter moans to sorrow they gave vent;Their breasts they beat, their hair they tore, their clothing rent.To count their multitudes is in God’s power alone;Turks, Arabs, Kurds, and Romans, men of every zone.They scattered o’er their heads the dust from his last home;To mourn for him was balm, all ills to overcome.They wept. Their bitter, briny tears they shed in floods;His grave a pool; those tears, as streamlets from the woods.   355To lose him was a grief unspeakable that fellOn rich and poor, on high and low, too sad to tell. 
A month of mourning past, the people sought to knowWhom he’d appointed in his place their way to show.Whom must we recognise successor to our saint?Into whose hands commit the task of our restraint? 
He was a sun of light; his fire hath turned to fume,A candle now we need our darkness to illume.Our friend is gone, — is lost to our inquiring eyes.360   A substitute we seek, — memorial we may prize.Our rose is withered; — rosebush leaves all blown away,Which vase holds now the rose-scent in its perfumed clay?” 
God is invisible to weakly mortal sight,His prophets are a need, to guide His Church aright.No! That’s not right! That phrase is sadly incorrect.A prophet’s one with God; not two. Think well! Reflect!They are not two; they’re one. Thou blind materialist!With God they’re one; their forms but make Him manifest.Thou seest the form alone; thy two eyes are at fault.365   Look with thy soul; thou’lt see as God from heaven’s vault.Thy two sights will united be straightway in one,When thou behold’st the Light of God’s eternal throne. 
Set up ten burning candles in one selfsame place,A separate body, each, diffuses light and grace.Their powers combine in one, to brighten that retreat;Distinction now there’s none; one light alone we meet.Count out a hundred apples, quinces, pears, or plums;When mashed together, all their juice, their pulp, their scums.Things spiritual division, number, parts, know not,370   They split not into fractions, form no separate lot. 
’Tis sweet when friends with friends together come and meet.Trust then the spirit. “’Tis the letter kills” — repeat.Thy body mortify; thy flesh consume with pains.Behind it hid thou’lt find God’s unity — thy gains.If thou the body vex not, — bring not low betimes,The flesh will thee destroy, my friend, in fiery flames. 
The flesh it is that shows itself to human heart;The flesh it is demands asceticism’s sharp smart. 
We simple were; one essence was the source of all.Nor Head, nor foot had we; one pristine lot did fall.   375One substance held us; we were clear as is the sun;No knots or gnurs within us, free as water’s run.On taking fleshly form, that simple essence, then,Became divided, split, like shadows in each glen.Make low the hills and hillocks, level make the plain;No shadow’s left; the whole becomes one scene again. 
With pleasure I’d this matter clearer put, and joy.But tender consciences I seek not to annoy.Abstruser points there are, as keen as sword in fight.If reason’s shield thou hast not, refuge take in flight.   380My arguments contest not, unless well prepared.Sharp blade will cut; it pities not; no life is spared.I sheathe my sword of argument, — will not make assault.Lest muddlers read me wrong, and say ’tis I’m at fault. 
We come now back again, to follow up our tale,To keep our faith with readers, feminine and male;And say again, the people rose up as one man,Demanding who should work out our dead Vazīr’s plan. 
One legion-captain forward came, out of the twelve,That grieving people’s furrowed field anew to delve.   385Said he: “Behold! successor am I to the saint.In Jesu’s stead I’m regent, by his own constraint.You see this scroll. ’Tis evidence of what I say:The dead Vazīr’s successorship is mine to-day!” A second captain started up, as from ambush;Contested all those words; his own claim then did push. 
Forth from his bosom he another scroll produced,And then the people’s wrath flamed high; not soon reduced.The other captains, too, — each his own train at back, — 390   Unsheathed their swords, and threatened both their skulls to crack.Then each one of the twelve, his sword and scroll in hand,Upon the others set, like baited bull on brand.The slain were strewn in heaps of many hundred men,Their heads were piled in pyramids, by thousands ten.Their blood was shed in torrents, flowing on the plain.The dust arose in clouds through this commotion vain.The seeds of discord sown by that knave’s treacherous hand,Had now produced their harvest, fatal to the land.The nuts he cracked were skulls; their kernels, human brains.395   The bodies slain through him held precious souls in chains. 
Be killed, or die, as in thy lot may be decreed.So with pomegranates, apples, when sliced up at need.The sweet and sound are prized, and straightway put to use;The sour and rotten cast away, worthless refuse.A word with sense and meaning’s ever eloquent;Bald nonsense is laughed down in scorn or merriment.Thou fool, materialist! Think closer: look to sense. The spirit ’tis gives value; words are mere pretence.Prefer the company of those who spirit seek.400   So mayst thou grace attain,— “God’s servant be,” and meek.A life without a soul or spirit in our frame,Like wooden sword in sheath, were but a senseless name. 
Within its sheath while kept, of value it may seem;When drawn, ’tis only fit for matchwood, men will deem,Arm not thyself with wooden sword in battle’s day.Examine well thy weapon, if thou ‘d have fair play.Shouldst find thy sword of wood, another seek forthwith;If adamant it prove to be, then join thy kith. 
The truest swords are found in th’ arm’ry of the saints.Their converse is to thee a balm for all complaints.   405The wise have ever said, with uniform accord:“Most truly wise was he, ‘the Mercy of the Lord.’” 
Dost buy a pomegranate? A burst fruit still elect.The crack reveals its grains; thou seest they’ve no defect.E’en so, good friend, blest be the man whose mouth revealsThe heart-thought pearls their casket, his pure soul, conceals.But inauspicious is the opening tulip’s crack;This patent makes to all that its heartcore is black.The burst pomegranate is a sunny orchard’s pride.So speech of worthy men may waft thee to truth’s side.   410Society with saints no doubt’s of great avail;To piety it leads; “God’s fear shall never fail.” Thou wast a very rock, a worthless pebble stone;By saints’ communion fined, a pearl of price thou’st shone.Then love the saints. Their love plant deeply in thy heart.The pure of mind alone deserve a pure love’s part.Court not despair; hope ever springs in human breast.Seek not the dark; the Sun of Light shines full confest.The spirit ever leads to haunts of holy men;The flesh would cast thee in the pit of sin again.   415Beware! Feed thou thy soul with love from holy ground.Make haste! Seek means of grace from one who grace has found. 
Petition make! Seize hold upon the skirts of saints.Through them thou’lt learn how God his favour grants.The Gospel names the name of Ahmed; he the last,As chief of prophets; — purity’s bright ocean, vast.His lineaments, his virtues, ways of matchless good;With notice of his wars, his fasts, and eke his food.Some Christian folks, on mention of that sacred name,420   And this recital of his qualities and fame,A merit to acquire, were wont to kiss the book,To bow with reverence deep, humility in look.That folk in all the troubles we’ve related nowWere safe; nor bloodshed, nor foul faction did them know.Secured were they from scrolls, sword, captains, and Vazīr,In name of Ahmed Mustafà they’d trust, not fear.Descendants, numerous in race, they left behind;Their faith in Ahmed they a tower of strength did find.But other Christian folks to him refused to bow.425   The blessed name of Mustafà they deemed too low.Requital brought them punishment for this offence;A prey they fell unmourned to that Vazīr’s pretence.Their false creed, with their tribes, was quickly brought to end,Through those twelve lying volumes his deceit had penn’d.The name of Ahmed, thus, a friend is proved, of might;Of light by day a pillar, shelt’ring cloud by night.A castle inexpugnable, a stronghold safe,As he himself was Trusty, though his foes might chafe.How fatal the disasters pictured here above,430   The fruit of foul duplicity’s pretended love. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





IV. Another Jewish King, Persecutor of Christians 
A second Jewish king, descendant of the first,To persecute the Christians showed hate’s fiercest thirst.If information’s sought about this wicked king,That chapter of the Qur’ān read: “Heaven’s Girdle-Ring.” A sorry rite it was the first had introduced;With cruel zeal this wicked rite the last abused. 
The introducer of a rule that tends to ill,Draws on his head deep curses, morn and even, still.The good decease; their bright example serves as guide;The wicked soon decay; their name all men deride.   5The children of those sinners, till the trump of doom,Are cursed as soon as born; no lot more full of gloom. 
How many springs burst forth, one salt, the other sweet;Their savour changes, while the days and nights compete.The good are promised their inheritance aloft,Of waters sweet; in Scripture mentioned oft and oft. The seeker’s wish, if rightly we consider it,A scintillation is of flame from holy writ. 
No flame exists apart from body whence it burns;10   Where’er the burning body hies, the flame, too, turns.A window-light will wander all around a room;Because the rising sun to sunset tends, and gloom.That which to any constellation’s stars pertains,Must move with it, rise, set, south, as its place ordains. 
The man who under Venus’ influence was bornIs joyous, amorous, ambitious, with greed torn.If Mars his planet be, his temper’s bellicose;War, scandal, litigation, — these he most does choose.But other stars there are, the planets, seven, beside;15   And unto men from them nor good, nor ills betide.Revolving in another firmament than they,Above the spheres that bear the orbs of night and day.Bright through the moral splendour lent them by the Lord;Not bound together quite, nor yet in disaccord.The man whose soul is influenced by one of those,Like meteors, still shall drive away the spirit’s foes.His disposition feeleth not the rage of Mars;He temporises; — meekly acts in prosperous wars.His light’s triumphant; — darkness it shall never know.20   Between two fingers holdeth he the truth, I trow. 
The truth doth shed a shining light on human souls,Received by heaven’s favourites, in special ghostly strolls.Illumined with that light, as spangles deck a bride,They turn their souls to God, contemning all beside.Who feels not keenly love’s great soul-compelling might,Is portionless of spangles from truth’s flashing light. 
All parts must ever share the nature of their whole,As nightingale pours out unto one rose its soul.Whatever property may qualify a thing25   Externally, man’s qualities are mind’s offspring. 
From purity, rich colours rise, good qualities;Stains, — moral, or as dyes, — from gross impurities. 
“God’s Baptism” is the name of all that’s good in man;“The curse of God,” of all that’s evil in our plan. In which of these two seas our streamlets may subside,They but return into the source from whence their tide.From mountain-tops, swift torrents rushing down apace.From men’s frames, love-inspired souls, anon the race. 
The counsel hear, that now, this Jewish dog did take.Beside a fire a hideous idol he did make,   30And proclamation ran: “Whoever ‘d save his soul,This idol worships; or in fire he’s burnt to coal.” Thus having made his hate an idol to himself,A second idol straightway he invents, this elf. 
The mother of all idols is our fleshly pride.They’re dragons; this, the egg of cockatrice’s bride.The flesh is flint and steel; our pride is but its spark.That pride pervades the flesh as fecundation’s mark.Can moisture quench the latent spark in flint and steel?Can man be safe while flesh and pride he lives to feel;   35In flint and steel we know that fire is still alive.No water’s of avail that fire from them to drive.With water we put out a fire when burning bright;The spark in flint and steel is safe from water’s might. 
From flint and steel of flesh what burnings still ensue!Their sparks, the blasphemies of Christian and of Jew!If water in the jug and pitcher come to end,On wellspring we must draw, a fresh supply to send. 
Our idol is the muddy dregs left in our jug;40   The flesh the sewer from whence it filters, spite of plug.The graven idol (fed from blackest sewer tideIn flesh, its graver), was as fountain by wayside.The inward idol, pride, the filthy jug’s black slush;The prurient flesh, the source from which it had its gush. 
A hundred potters’ pitchers one small stone can break;And spill the cooling water drawn our thirst to slake.To smash an idol, too, quite easy may appear;Not easy to root out the flesh; too hard, I fear. 
Would see the picture of the flesh, inquiring youths?45   Description read of hell, with seven yawning mouths. 
From each soul’s flesh comes forth a special mode of guile.Each guile, a whirlpool ready Pharaoh’s hosts to spoil.In Moses, and in Moses’ God, seek refuge then.Abandon not God’s faith for Pharaohs and their men.The one true God adore; in Ahmed’s faith believe.Thy soul and body save, — from Abū-Dahl retrieve. The Jew a Christian mother to that idol brought.An infant in her arms; the fire with blazes fraught.“Fall down and worship;” cried he, “senseless stock adore;50   The fire shall then not harm thee, now, nor evermore.”That mother was a woman firm in true belief;And thence disdained prostration, though ‘t should give relief. 
They snatched her infant; next, they dashed it in the flame.The mother’s spirit quailed to see this deed of shame. 
Though not herself, to save her infant, she’d bow down.But lo! a miracle! The babe cried: “Let alone!Uninjured am I here. Come in. Be not dismayed.’Tis cool and pleasant. Cease to feel of fire afraid; — Mere blinding bandage to the eyes; — naught but a veil.God’s mercy’s here revealed, — made manifest. All hail!   55Come in, my mother, dear. The truth thou shalt record.Thou’lt here perceive how saints hold converse with the Lord.Come in; and witness water blazing high, as fire.This is a world where flame like water is; — not dire.Come. Look on miracles for blessed Abr’am wrought; Whose furnace changed to gardens, out of firewood brought.Death then I underwent, when I was born of thee.The fear of death swept o’er me, ere my eyes could see.With birth I ‘scaped from prison, narrow, dark, and drear;Emerging to a world, vast, radiant, bright, and clear.   60Alas! that world, you see, is but a second womb.Joy, comfort, happiness, are found beyond the tomb.Within this fire a realm of wonders lies around;Each atom’s here a Jesus; — balm to heal each wound.This world I’m in’s reality; — not merely form.The scene I’ve left’s all vanity; — food for the worm.Come in, my mother; quick! Seize this auspicious hour.Come in! Let opportunity not ‘scape thy pow’r.Come in; come in; in name of parent’s tenderness.Come in! This fire has no devouring ruthlessness.   65Come in! Thou’st witnessed all that Jewish dog can move.Come in! The grace and power of God Almighty prove.’Tis from my love for thee I thus so much insist;From pleasure felt by me, for thee I’ve fear dismissed.Come in; come in! And others call, to follow thee.The Great King here His bounteous table’s spread for me. 
Come in; come in! All of you, saints of God, elect!Resigned ones! Faith’s cup of martyrdom select!Come in! Flock in; in crowds; as moths around a light!70   This year has tens of thousands springs; but not one night.” 
Thus loudly cried the infant from its bed of flame.Th’ assembled crowds all heard it. All were seized with shame.A sudden holy impulse urged them to obey.In crowds those men and women cast their lives away.No force was needed; — no compulsion; — all was love;For bitterness is sweet to all whom love doth move.To such a point it came that guards and soldiers, all,Were fain to cry: “Withhold! The fire is more than full!” 
The Jewish king at sight of all this love and zeal,75   Was shamed, — was thunderstruck; his wicked heart did reel.He saw that faith can give the lover’s ardent flame.Self-sacrifice is naught in true devotion’s name.Thank God! Beelzebub was conquered in that Jew.Thank God! ’Twas Satan’s self these darksome deeds did rue.The shame he sought to bring upon the cheeks of some,A hundredfold was heaped on his own head at home.He thought from others’ shame the veiling leaf to tear;He saw them safe, his own foul nakedness laid bare. 
A ribald fellow once, by lewdest mob sustained,80   Called railing out on Ahmed. Wry his mouth remained.He then came begging pity, in the Prophet’s trace:“Forgive, Muhammed, who’rt endued with wisdom’s grace.For want of knowing better, insolent I was.’Tis I that merit scorn and mockery. Alas!” 
When God decides to humble any sinner, proud,A demon stirs this last t’ insult some man of God.And he whom God elects to cloak where ’tis he halts,Has grace bestowed on him to cover others’ faults.Should favour from the Lord in mercy reach a man,Humility is given him; to pray ‘s part of his plan.   85 
How blessed are the eyes that smart with sorrow’s brine!How blessed is the heart inflamed with love divine!Contrition’s tears are ever hallowed by heaven’s smile.The latter end of all things man should scan awhile.Wherever water flows, the fields are fresh and green.Tears followed are by grace; — as all the prophets ween.Then imitate the water-wheel, that groans and weeps. By prayers, and moans, and tears, a man his heart pure keeps.Wouldst thou shed tears? Feel pity, when thou meetest woe.Wouldst mercy find? Show mercy, when men bow them low.   90 
The Jewish king reproached the fire: “O raging thing!Thy all-destructive might, where is it? Where’s thy sting?If thou wilt not consume, what quality hast thou?Or has my fortune veered; and with it, thy dread glow?Thou sparest not thy worshippers, the Magian race.Whence comes it; these who spurn thee, Christians, meet with grace?Thou never wast, O fire, for patience noted here.Why burn’st thou not? What is there? Hast thou lost thy power?Is this eye-binding? Is it, rather, reason’s blind?How is’t thy flames consume not all their hated kind?   95 
Bewitched thee have they? Or is’t magic natural?Or is’t my fortune wills that thou turn prodigal?” 
To him the fire: “O miscreant! I’m still the same.Come in and try, thou, how thou’lt find my smallest flame.My nature, as my substance, has not suffered change.Outside my nature’s limit I’ve no power to range.At door of Turkman’s tent the savage household dogsDo wag their tails before a guest, and crouch like logs.But should a stranger pass by, near the guarded tent,100   Him then those dogs assail, with lion-like intent.Less than a dog I’m not, in service to my Lord.Than Turkman less, there’s none, in rights, upon earth’s sward.” 
When fire thy body injures, and inflicts some harm;Remember, its consuming power can also warm.And when a fire thus serves thee, acts some needful part,Reflect! Those qualities thou seest did God impart.Art injured, ‘haps? Fall down; entreat the Lord with prayer.The hurtful power was given by Him in gracious care.Should He so will, each injury a blessing is.105   Chained captives find their freedom by a word of His. 
Fire, air, earth, water, all are servants of their God.I, thou, them lifeless deem. He knows they live and plod.In presence of the great Creator fire must stillIts service do; and, lover-like, work out His will.Thou strikest flint on steel; fire instantly leaps forth.’Tis by commandment of the Lord it thus takes birth.Strike not together, thou, the flint and steel of lust.For, male and female like, they’ll generate; they must. 
The flint and steel are means. Far higher raise thy look.110   With reason thou’rt endowed. Go; read the holy book. 
One means comes from another means; and cause from cause.Without a means or cause, no means from self e’er rose.The means by which all prophets’ miracles are wrought,Of higher order are than earthly means; no doubt.Man’s mind can compass how these latter act, and when;The former hidden are from all but prophet’s ken.These former ’tis that give the latter power to act;And rarely, that, their normal action, counteract. 
A means a rope is, by the help of which we reach;And in this worldly pit by means each reaches each.   115Around its coiling cylinder the well-rope’s wound.To shut our eyes to this would blind indeed be found.The ropes by means of which results are seen to steer,In this our world, deem not they’re moved by star or sphere;Lest thou become confused and giddy like a wheel; — Take fire, consume, like tinder, sparks of shame to feel. 
The air becomes a fire at times by God’s decree.Both air and fire run wild with joy, His means to be.The streams of mercy, the consuming fires of wrath,Thou’lt see, my son, are both from God. Look well, forsooth.   120Were not the wind aware of God’s almighty power,How had it ever blown the blast of ‘Ad’s last hour?Around his Muslims Hal a saving circle drew.The wind within that mystic circuit softly blew.While all that were beyond were dashed to pieces soon.Like chaff before the breeze, their limbs around were strewn. 
Shaybān the shepherd, too, a circle round his foldWas used to draw; whate’er the season, hot or cold;On Fridays, when, at midday’s sacred hour of praise,125   He to a congregation hied; lest wolf should seize.No wolf was ever known to break the holy spell;Nor sheep to stray beyond; each knew the limit well. 
To wind, to wolf, to sheep, and lusts of every one,The circle traced by saint a barrier was, like stone.To Gnostic, so likewise, the harmless gale of deathBlows mild and gentle, summer-breezes-like on heath.And fire was fangless; could not Abraham offend.How should it hurt him? Was he not God’s “Chosen Friend”? 
The pious man burns not in fire of fleshly lust.130   But sinners still consumed are upon earth’s crust.The Red Sea waves, all raging by divine command,The host of Israel knew; but Pharaoh’s armies drown’d.The earth, again, wide gaping at Jehovah’s word,Did Korah and his wealth devour; but Moses spared. 
In Jesu’s hand, warmed with his breath, the fictile clayAs living birds arose, spread wing, and flew away. Thy lauds and praises, too, breath from thy frame account.Sincerity them vivifies; to heaven they mount. 
The rock of Sion danced at sight of Moses’ God 135   As perfect cenobite; its faults were all removed.What wonder if a hill should dance and saint become?Was not great Moses’ self a clod of clay and loam? 
The Jewish king now manifested great surprise.These things, he said, were mockeries, mere patent lies.His councillors conjured him more sedate to be;And not to push his hardihood to rash degree. 
These councillors he fettered, into prison cast;Injustice to injustice adding, first and last. 
A shout was heard from heaven when matters reached that point:“Jew dog! Prepare for vengeance from on high! Aroynt!”   140The fire then blazed amain; its flames lapped all around.It slew and burnt the mob of Jews from off the ground.Their origin was hell, from whence their souls had come;Their goal was also hell; to it they now went home.The Jewish race is hellish; many proofs are shown.Parts are they of a whole accursed; as is well known.Their nature hellish; all their joy God’s saints to burn.Their fire recoiled upon themselves. ’Twas justice’ turn.For them, who were, by nature, children born of wrath,The lowest depths of hell were fittest cells, forsooth.   145A mother ever yearneth after her own child;A dam is ever followed by her offspring wild. 
Though true that water may enclosed be in a tank,The air will it absorb. ’Twas thence to earth it sank.Air sets it free; direct, restores it to its source,By little and by little. None perceive its course. 
So, too, our breath, in manner like, steals soul away,By little and by little, from this house of clay,In words of praise, ascending to God’s holy throne,From us to where He reigns; — as known to Him alone.   150 
Our breathings rise on wings of true sincerity,The offerings of our hearts to all eternity.We then receive rewards for those poor words of praise,In tenfold showers of mercy from th’ Ancient of Days.And we are still constrained to utter songs of thanks,That man should so be raised above th’ angelic ranks. 
This rising and descending alternates for aye.The Lord forbid that I should fail therein one day!We’re drawn, we are attracted, so to love the Lord;155   As we were first instructed, firm to trust His word. 
Each man will turn his eyes in hope towards the place,Where he has tasted joy some former day of grace.The pleasures of each kind are most with their own kin;As part must share with whole its qualities, its sin.Things needs must be assigned unto a common class,If aught they have in common; two will form a race.Thus bread and water are not human at the first;But human they become, through hunger and through thirst.In form they have no tie with us of human kind;160   But through a special link they kindred with us find. 
If pleasure, then, we find in what’s not of our race,Be sure there’s some connection through which this takes place.If that connection but resemblance be in shape,It will not last; it’s for a time; it must escape. 
’Tis true that birds find pleasure in a whistle’s note;But then they fancy ’tis their mate’s, on whom they dote.And if a thirsty man take pleasure in his wine,He tastes the lees, and loathes. To water he’ll incline.A pauper may amused be with counterfeited coin;165   But take this to the mint; defaced ‘twill be, in fine.Then be not thou misled with gilded counterfeit;Delusion will thee plunge headlong into hell’s pit. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





V. The Lion and the Beasts 
Kalīl’ and Dimna’s book relates a charming tale, From which males may a moral draw; — and eke, female.Within a shelter’d vale, four-footed game in droves,Were kept in tremor by a lion from its groves.So frequently had he borne victims off from thence,The vale a prison had become in every sense.A consultation held, they fair proposals state,To satisfy the lion’s hunger by a rate;But on condition that he rapine lay aside,And not prolong disquiet in that valley wide.   5The lion gave consent, if they’d perform their part;Remarking: “I’ve a victim been to wily art.Man persecutes me with his deadly stratagems;The snake and scorpion sting me; — rancour’s true emblems.But worse than any man, in venom and in spleen,The fleshly lust within me traitor’s always been.But I’ve grown wary. Has not Ahmed said: ‘Rely!Believers are not twice caught by the self-same lie?’” Their answer was: “O most sagacious, knowing guide,Thy caution pray dismiss; decree of God abide.   10 
Suspicion, caution, ever is corroding ill.Put trust in Providence; and God thy maw will fill.Strive not with Providence, however strong thou be;Lest Providence should take offence, and war with thee.” 
He answered them: “Sure! Sure! Trust Providence we must.His prophets in the Lord have always placed their trust.To trust in God, and yet put forth our utmost skill,The surest method is, to work His holy will.The Prophet plainly said to his disciple train:15   ‘Put trust in God, and bind thy camel’s shank amain?’ Remember the old saw: ‘The friend of God must work.’ Through trust in God, neglect not ways and means, O clerk.” 
Abashed they were not; answer thus they promptly made:“To gain aught from the poor is fraud; a trick of trade.There is no gain so good as trust placed in the Lord.What more praiseworthy than to build upon His word?How many flee this danger, falling into that!
From fryingpan leaps one, to light in fire right pat. Man plans a stratagem; in it is caught himself.20   That which he took for health, he finds is death itself.He locks his door when treason’s lurking in his house.So Pharaoh deemed he’d danger shun ere it should rouse.How many thousand infants did he doom to death;While Moses, whom he feared, his own roof was beneath.Our eyes afflicted are with various kinds of ills.Then go and make them blind, by seeing God ’tis wills.God’s sight of providence is keener than men’s eyes.By seeing with His sight, thou’lt find all thou wilt prize.An infant, that can neither grasp nor walk as yet, 
Takes seat upon his father’s neck, and runs. Sweet pet.   25Some seasons past, he scarcely gains some strength of limb;When sorrow fastens on him; — sharp, and ghastly grim.The hearts of men, before they gain or power or wealth,Decline away from duty, pleasures seek by stealth.And since by God’s decree from paradise they’re rent,They prisoners become to rage, lust, discontent.We are the household of that Householder, whose wordThus spake: ‘Creation’s all as children of the Lord.’ He that doth send the fattening rain upon the earth,In mercy, too, can feed His creatures from their birth.”   30 
The lion thus replied: “’Tis true. But still, the LordA ladder sets before our feet to be explor’d.Step after step we have to mount unto the roof.Th’ idea of compulsion’s quite devoid of proof.Two feet thou hast. Then why thyself hold to be lame?Two hands also. Why maimed account thyself in name?Whene’er a master puts a spade in hand of slave,He has no need to speak; the act expression gave.Our hands just so are given; spades they are to us.Think out this problem well; it needs not any fuss.   35When thou hast laid this unction to thy soul amain,In duty’s path to lay down life thou’lt count as gain.Those symbols indices are, whence are secrets known.Responsibility’s from thee withdrawn; work shown.Thou’rt surely burdened. Borne also most truly art.Recipient; hence accepted; — fully on His part.Recipient be of God’s command; content thou’lt be.Seek unto Him; and to Him joined thyself thou’lt see.To strive to give thanks power provides this to perform.Allege compulsion. Gratitude’s ground thou’lt deform.   40Thanks for thy powers the power of thanks tenfold expands. 
Take favour for compulsion. Power will leave thy hands.Compulsion dost affirm? That’s sleeping by the way.Go not to sleep until thou’st fairly won the day.Sleep not, Compulsionist? Thou man, with folly rifeUntil thou reach the goal, the fruitful Tree of Life.The cool breeze there will rustle through its leaves profuse,Each moment scattering fruits for food and future use.Compulsion’s creed is sleep among the highwaymen;45   Unseasonable bird is mercilessly slain. If thou at God’s signs carp and peek, so finding fault,Though man thou count thyself, ’tis womanlike assault.The little sense thou hadst has really taken flight;A head that has no brains is tail turn’d round to sight.Ungrateful men are ever cursed of God on earth;And after death are flung to hell-fire’s vengeful hearth.If thou repose thy trust in God’s almighty pow’r,Sow first thy seed; and then, await the harvest hour.” 
The beasts a clamour raised; they would not be repressed:50   “They who on means depend, are urged by greed confessed.The millions upon millions, man and womankind,Are pinched by want; they suffer need; they food scarce find.By millions and by millions, since creation’s day, — Insatiate dragons, — they their gaping jaws display.A crowd of would-be wise men stratagems invent,Enough to upset mountains, could they give them vent.So God himself described in His most holy bookTheir arts: ‘By which they’d tear away the hills.’ Just look.Except the lot decreed by Providence of yore,55   By hunting or by toiling none can swell his store.Device of man, his plans, shall all be brought to naught.God’s dispensations sole will stand, with wisdom fraught. 
Strive not then, man of sense; except good name to leave.Exertion’s a delusion. Out! Thou sottish knave!” 
A simpleton one morning rushing came in haste,Where Solomon his court of justice then had placed.His cheeks were blanched, his lips were blue; effects of fright.Said Solomon to him: “What ails thee? Say aright.”Him answer’d that poor wretch: “The angel, Lord, of death, Upon me fixed, just now, a look that stopped my breath.”   60Said Solomon: “What wilt thou I should do for thee?”He answered: “That the wind may now commanded be To carry me away forthwith to Hindūstān.Perchance by fleeing thither, save my life I can.” 
See how mankind do shun the garb of poverty.Hence they’re a prey to greed and dire necessity.This fear of poverty is like that man’s dismay,Its Hindūstān, remark, is greed and grasping’s sway. 
So Solomon the wind commanded, him, forthwith,To bear to Hindūstān; and land him near some frith.   65 
Another day as Solomon his court did hold,Death’s angel came; the king to him the matter told:“Thy wrathful look, the other day, upon that man,Has driven him his home to quit for Hindūstān.Didst thou in wrath survey the pious man that way,That he might wander forth a waif, like sheep astray?Or was thy look’s intent, so dreadful to behold,His soul to separate from its corporeal fold?” 
To him replied the angel: “King of sprites and men!His fancy him misled; he’ll ne’er do so again.   70 
’Twas not in anger then that I did look on him;’Twas wonder him to see here, looking hale and prim.For God had me commanded: ‘Go this very day,And take his soul in Hindūstān, his debt to pay.’In wonder, then, I said within myself: ‘Had heA hundred wings, in Hindūstān he could not be.’But going, still, by God’s command, to Hindūstān,Him there I found, and took his soul with my own hand.” 
So thou, good reader, understand, the things of earth75   ’Tis God ordains. Reflect. ’Twas written ere his birth.From whom to flee? From self? Oh! That’s absurd!From whom to steal? From God? Worse, worse! No word! 
The lion now remarked: “The words you speak are true.But just consider how the prophets, saints, ensue.What they have wrought hath God blessed, made to prosper still;Their joys and griefs, their sufferings, pains, were by His will.Their stratagems dictated by their God were, all. ‘Who comes of gentle blood, will gentle words let fall.’ Their traps have taken angels with the baits they placed.80   Their seeming slips and faults were all by wisdom traced.Exert thyself, O man; put shoulder to the wheel,The prophets and the saints to imitate in zeal.Exertion’s not a struggle against Providence.’Twas Providence enjoined it, — made it our defence.Blasphemer may I be, if ever single manBestowed in vain one effort to fulfil God’s plan.Thou hast no broken bones; why bind thy limbs in splints?Have patience yet awhile; then laugh; we’re not mere flints. 
It is a bad investment to seek worldly gain. Whose hope is placed in heaven never shall see pain.   85The stratagems employed for worldly gain are vile,But stratagems for gaining heaven are worth our while.Blest stratagem is that which bursts a prison door.Curst stratagem is one that spreads a dungeon floor.The world’s a dungeon. We are all in prison here.Burst, then, thy prison gate, and free thyself from fear.What is the world? Unmindful of our God to be;Not gold or silver, wife or children, things we see.The wealth we hold at service of our God is blest.‘The riches of the just are pure,’ Ahmed confess’d.   90The water from a leak is danger to a ship;The sea beneath her keel is just what makes her skip.Great Solomon despised wealth, sway, with all his heart.With countless treasures poor he named himself. Best part!An empty jar will float upon a raging sea,The air that fills it will not let it sunken be.Th’ afflatus of true poverty man’s soul will buoy.Above the troubles of the world he rides. Ahoy!Should all earth’s boundless riches by him be possessed;The whole is viewed in his pure sight as naught at best.   95Close then the inlet to thy heart; seal it with love;First filling it with wisdom’s spirit from above.Endeavour is from God; so sickness, and its balm.He vainly strives who would deny this truthful psalm.” 
Of this complexion, many proofs the lion brought;No answer those compulsionists in dispute sought.The fox, the deer, the hare, and eke the sly jackal,Were fain to quit compulsion’s cause, for good and all. 
A treaty they concluded with the forest king,That he, by this concession, should not lose a thing.   100 
His daily ration ready always should be found;And he should have no cause to trespass on their ground.Lots they would cast among themselves from day to day.On whom the lot should fall, he’d be the lion’s prey. 
But lo, at length the lot upon the hare did light.He found it very hard, and wailed his awful plight.The other beasts remarked: “We each have had our turn;And none of us refused th’ agreement to confirm.By breach of faith on us fresh infamy bring not.105   Begone forthwith; the lion must not be forgot.” 
The hare replied: “Dear friends, a respite to me grant.A stratagem I’ll plan, and cheat this grim tyrant.My wily plan shall save the souls of all alive;And safety heirloom be your children shall derive.Thus every prophet’s promised to his sect, at least,Salvation from the doom o’erhanging man and beast.They found a ready way to ‘scape beyond the spheres,So soon as to reflect they turned their minds from fears.Man sees another’s eye is but a wee, wee thing;110   He knows how great a service can th’ eye’s pupil bring.” 
The beasts in answer: “Jackass! Prate to us no more.Consider. Thou’rt a hare; a beast of no great store.What talk is this? Thy betters ne’er have used such speech.They never would have dared to think as thou dost preach.It must be thou’rt o’erweening, or our fate’s at hand.For otherwise, pretensions such as thine can’t stand.” 
To them as a rejoinder puss spoke: “My dear friends,My inspiration’s God’s; small means effect great ends.The wisdom God hath taught the little honey-bee,115   You do not find possessed by lion, or by me. 
We see its cells arranged, with liquid sweetness filled,The portals of such art to open God hath willed.Then see the silkworm, how it’s taught by God to spin.Have elephants the power to draw out threads so thin?The earthy Adam was by God taught all our names. His knowledge was the admiration of heaven’s frames.Th’ angelic choir were silenced; they knew not so much.The fiend be cursed. He’d not confess the fact was such.That fasting hermit of six hundred thousand years Became the new-born babe’s dire muzzle, — source of tears.   120Lest it should suck the milk religion’s teachings give, — Lest it should soar on high around heaven’s towers, and live, — The learning of external sense a muzzle lies, — The milk of truth sublime’s denied to all its cries.But God hath planted in man’s heart a precious pearl.Nor seas, nor skies, such gem enclose within their whirl!How long of form thy talk — form-worshipper — vain man?Cannot thy senseless soul cast off form’s deadening ban?Did human form alone suffice a man to make,Ahmed and Abū-Jahl were one in grade, in stake.   125A painting on a wall may show the human form.But look and see what lacks, the figure to inform.’Tis life it wants, and soul; — the pretty-looking thing!Ask for its life. No! No! Though portrait of a king.The heads of all earth’s lions bowed down meek and low,When God the Seven Sleepers’ dog applauded. How!To call it dog, to charge it with defect of race,No harm can do it; God in heaven hath given it place. 
’Twas not the pen prescrib’d the qualities of form;130   Th’ Omniscient, the Just, ’twas, made it multiform.Th’ Omniscient, the Just, a Spirit is, All-Blest;Him no place holds; He’s not before, behind, east, west.He influences matter from His high abode;But heaven of heavens cannot contain the Spirit’s mode.” 
That theme is endless. Let us then just turn away.Let’s ask about the hare; hear what he has to say.Sell off thy ass’ ears; with the price a fresh pair buy.An ass’s ears will never understand this cry. Go to. Examine well the hare’s most foxy wile, — 135   The subtle stratagem that did the lion foil. 
Wisdom’s the seal by which great Solomon did rule.The whole world’s but a frame, and wisdom is its soul.Hence ’tis, by wisdom’s spell, as clay on potter’s wheel,The seas, the hills, the plains, are made man’s power to feel.The lion, tiger, leopard, dread him as does mouse;The shark, the crocodile, he follows to their house.The demon and the fairy, both constrained to flight,Have hid themselves from him, — are only seen by night.The human being has his foes hid every side.140   A prudent man by caution may in safety bide.Those hidden foes, — the hideous, and the fair as well, — By day and night affect his heart with charm and spell. 
Thou enterest a river, just to have a bathe;A hidden thorn may pierce thy foot, bared of its swathe.Thou seest it not. ’Tis hid at bottom of the stream.Thou feel’st it in thy foot; thou knowest it’s not a dream.Plagues, troubles, fears, and cares, of various degree,All spring from many sides, and fix themselves in thee. 
Bear all with patience; slowly thou’lt experience gain.Thou’lt recognise the truth; the dark will be made plain.   145At length thou’lt scout the vagaries of learned men,And take unto thyself, as patterns, saints of ken. 
The beasts on second thoughts resolved to hear puss out.“Explain,” said they, “what ’tis thou’dst have us set about.Let’s hear; ’tis with the lion we shall have to do.Set forth thy plan; let’s see what stratagem’s in view.Deliberation’s ever wisdom’s truest friend;Two heads than one are better, — lead to safer end.The prophet spake: ‘O ruling judge, ere thou decide,Take counsel; for ’tis said: “In councillors confide.”’“   150 
The hare objects: “A secret’s not for ev’ry clod.Odd even is at times; and sometimes even’s odd.Too closely with a mirror shouldst thou converse hold,From prudery it umbrage takes, grows dull; the scold.On matters three, allow not oft thy lips to speak:First, going; gold, next; third, the path thou hast to seek.These all have sundry enemies and deadly foes,Who’ll lie in ambush, each, if he thy purpose knows.If thou ‘Adieu’ to only one or two shouldst call,Remember: ‘Two’s a secret; three is none at all.’   155If fast together thou shouldst bind birds, two or three,They’ll quiet lie on earth, nor strive themselves to free.Men hold it best to ask for counsel in wide terms.Beware; and wrangle not with perverse pachyderms.The Prophet covertly men’s counsel used to seek.His answer he’d obtain; his purpose did not leak.He’d speak in parables, and so convey his wish,That foes might hear, but not suspect its purport. Pish!He’d ferret out in answers all he wished to learn;And still not give an inkling of his thought’s real turn.”   160 
Enough we’ve said of this. Now turn we to our tale.By puss the lion’s held right hungry in the vale.And so it was; the hare his counsel did conceal;He would not let his comrades learn how he would deal.Some hours he now let pass before he took his leave;Then to the lion went, their honour to retrieve. 
He found the brute impatient, chafing at delay,From hunger’s pangs fierce howling, tearing every spray;And roaring in his rage: “I knew it so would be!165   Those vile, time-serving rascals! Thus they worry me!They’re plausible, smooth-speaking, bland, calm, mild; and stillThey’ve cheated me! Alas! Who will be cheated, will!A too complaisant prince most foully is let in!Who sees no farther than his nose, none heeds a pin!” 
The path is smoothed beneath which lurks a deadly trap.A missive’s filled with compliments; all mere clap-trap.Bland messages, smooth words, are but a hook or snare.Civility’s a sandbank; life’s bark’s oft wrecked there,The sand from which a spring of water’s seen to flow170   Is rare to find. Go, seek such. Where? I do not know. 
Yes, yes! Be sure that sand’s a holy man of God,Unto himself lost, rapt, in union with his Lord.Religion’s crystal waters flow from him apace;Disciples thence are edified and grow in grace.A worldling is a sandbank, void of moisture quite,On which you may make shipwreck, lose all chance of light.Seek wisdom, then, from wisdom’s sons, the pure of mind;So mayest thou learn the way salvation’s port to find. 
A seeker after wisdom, is, of wisdom, fount.175   “Humanities” he shuns; them, he does trash account. 
A memory replete with holy Qur’ān’s loreA “hidden tablet” is; its mind is wisdom’s store.If man begin as pupil to good common sense,He’ll end by being teacher, — mind, his audience.Man’s mind declares, as Gabriel to Ahmed there, “One step beyond due limit leaves me ashes sere.Go forward, man of God; leave me; I know my place.To every one’s not given to see God face to face.” 
Whoever, out of sloth, endeavour’s path shall quit,And patience lose, compulsion’s creed must needs admit.   180Whoe’er affirms compulsion, brings woe on himself,Until his troubles to the grave conduct the elf. 
The Prophet said: “My mission, ‘s truth to preach to man.Much trouble will surround it during my life’s span.”Compulsion’s but the setting of a broken bone, Or binding of a muscle, torn, asunder gone.Thou hast not broke thy leg in travelling God’s path.Why put thy leg in splints? Cast off the idle swath.He that shall really lose a leg in God’s just fight,To him Burāq shall come, a chariot of light.   185Religion’s carrier was he; carried then he’ll be.God’s precepts he accepted; accepted now is he.The Great King’s orders has he bravely carried out.Henceforward he’s a herald; — shall God’s judgments shout.The planets until now may have affected him;Above the planets now he rests, and rules their trim. 
If forms material find much honour in thy sight,Thou’lt doubt the truth of writ: “The moon clave,” left and right. Renew thy faith at heart, not merely with mouth’s gust,190   O hypocrite, who covertly dost worship lust.While lust is dominant, faith cannot be so strong;For lust ‘s a bolt to close the door, lest faith should throng.The virgin text of God explain not thou away;Reform thyself; deform not what the Lord Both say.As suits thy lusts thou comments makest on God’s Qur’ān.Vile, as by thee perverted, is its sense, base man.Thy case resemblance has with one of silly fly,Who once upon a time himself thought very high.Intoxicated was he, though he’d sipp’d no wine.195   Like sunbeam’s mote he saw himself most gaily shine.He’d heard of noble falcons scorning lure and cage;And straightway dubbed himself the phœnix of the age. 
Our fly on scrap of straw, in pool from ass’s ease,Had poised himself, as though a sailor on the seas.Then cried: “Lo! I’ve called forth a sea and ship at will.Long since I ‘ve had a notion, pleasure’s cup to fill.Behold a sea and ship of which I captain am,Imbued with naval science, bold as any ram.” 
Imagination thus had conjured up a sea.200   To him it boundless seemed, dwarfing credulity.Compared with him it was a truly boundless pool.When people see with their own eyes, call them not fool.His universe was measured by his power of sight.To such an eye such pool a sea was. He was right. 
A false interpreter of scripture is such fly.His fancy is the urine pool on which straws ply. 
If flies in fancy thus explain the things they see,By fortune’s freaks, in turn, a phœnix each may be.He’s less than fly, of whom this tale example lends;His soul unworthy is ev’n of the frame it tends.   205Just like the hare who’d lion undertake to fight,How should his soul remain in his poor carcase, slight? 
The lion growled in tones of anger and of rage:“My ear it was bewrayed me; war my foes did wage.Compulsionists’ false wiles placed bandage on my eyes.Their wooden swords it was that stung my skin, like flies.Henceforward I’ll not list to such cajoleries, — Of elves and demons, in the wilderness, mere cries.Tear, rend them; O my heart, pay no regard to them.Strip off their skins; there’s naught beneath; mere stratagem.”   210 
When words deceitful are employed as wraps for guile,They’re bubbles on the water, only last a while.Such words are merely shell; th’ intent their kernel is; — Or coloured portraiture of man; no life is his.A shell may often cover kernel of foul smell.A kernel sound can well afford to lose its shell. 
If mind be pen; if page be water, in thy hands;Be not surpris’d when all that’s written quick disbands.On water ’tis to write, t’ expect good faith from bail.Regret must follow. Shrug your shoulders. What avail!   215 
Man with desires is oft puffed up, and wishes vain.Put out desire; you’ll find Jehovah’s endless reign.His messages are peace, and sweet to pious soul;For He alone’s eternal, free from change, and whole. 
Men’s prayers for kings and princes change full oft in tone.The prayers of saints and prophets call on God alone. 
Th’ existence of earth’s sovereign’s empty pomp and pride,The glories of a prophet in his God abide.The names of kings on coins are used a little while;220   The name of Ahmed there is ever seen to smile. That name of Ahmed covers all the prophets still; As hundred, when ’tis said, ninety includes as well. 
Reflections such as these would never have an end.So turn we through our hare and lion’s tale to wend. 
The hare but slowly towards the lion took his way.Wiles in his brain he hatched; weighed what he had to say.Procrastination served him his design to fill;He’d secrets, one or two, the royal mind to still. 
How many worlds there are that hang on wisdom’s worth.225   How vast an ocean wisdom! Compasses the earth.A shoreless ocean is the subtle mind of manA fearless diver sounds its depths; as who else can?Our bodies drift about in mind’s strong eddies still,Like basins on the water, at the stream’s sole will.Until they fill, they float like bowls, on ocean’s brink;And, like the bowls, when full, they cannot choose but sink. 
The wind’s invisible; a world without, we see.Our bodies are the waves or drops of that vast sea.Whatever means our bodies seek to grasp, anon,230   A billow drives it far; no sooner seen than gone. 
Until our hearts perceive the Giver of all good,The swiftly-flying bolt shot far from o’er the flood,They hold their coursers to be lost; and out of spite,They push their roadsters hastily, as thoughts invite.They hold their coursers to be lost; and all the whileLike noble courser, roadster’s borne them many a mile. 
They now begin to wail, distress’d, and ask the way.They knock at ev’ry door they see, they beg, they pray:“The stealer of our courser was a little child.What horse is this, my master? Seems it not too wild?”   235“O yes, a horse it is; but not the horse you want.Come to your senses, man; to some one else go chant.” 
The soul is void of patency and fellowship.Thou, like a wine-jar, full within, hast parched lip.How shouldst thou e’er distinguish red from green or brown,When these are all the colours unto thee well known?And when thy mind is dazed by colour’s magic round,All colour’s lost in one bright light diffused around.Those colours, too, all vanish from our view by night.We learn from this, that colour’s only seen through light.   240 
The sense of colour-seeing’s not from light distinct.So, too, the sudden rainbow of our mind’s instinct.From sunlight, and the like, all outer colours rise;The inward tints that mark our minds, from God’s sunrise.The light that lights the eye’s the light that’s in the heart.Eye’s light is but derived from what illumes that part.The light that lights the heart’s the light that comes of God,Which lies beyond the reach of sense and reason, clod! 
By night we have no light; no colour can we see.Thus, light we learn by darkness, its converse. Agree!   245A seeing of the light, perception is of tints;And these distinguished are through darkness’ gloomy hints.Our griefs and sorrows were by God first introduced,That joy to sense apparent thence should be reduced.Occult things, thus, by converse, grow apparent, all.Since God has no converse, apparent He can’t fall.Sight first saw light, and then the colours saw.From converse converse stands forth, as Frank from Negro.By converse of the light, distinguish we the light;A converse ’tis that converse shows unto our sight.   250 
The light of God no converse has in being’s bound;By converse, then, man has not its distinction found.Our eyes cannot distinguish God, decidedly;Though He distinguish Moses and the Mount from thee. 
Form and ideal, gnat and lion, word and sense,Sound of the voice and thought, learnst thou by dissidence,The words and sounds take rise from exercise of thought.The sea of thought is where? Of this thou knowest naught.Words, as thou seest, rise as waves upon the sea.255   The sea of thought thou knowest great, immense to be.The waves of thought arise, by breath of knowledge raised;They take the forms of words, of sounds, which ear has seized.Through words have forms arisen, and passed away again;As waves still lose themselves beneath the ocean’s main.From realm of formlessness, existence doth take form;And fades again therein.: “To Him we must return.” Each moment, then, for thee death and return await,As Ahmed hath declared: “Life’s transitory.” Wait!Thoughts, bolts are, shot by God into the air like dust.260   Whose thoughts can reach to God, through densest air of lust? 
The world’s renewed each moment, though we still remainIn ignorance that permanence can change sustain.Life, like a river, ceaselessly, is still renewed;And apes persistency, in forms by change subdued,Through fleetness it puts on continuity’s shape;Like squib when ’tis revolved in dark by boy with tape.A flash of flame, through motion’s necessary speed,Appears unto our eyes a fire of size, indeed. 
Its length and its extension, through quickness of fact,Appear to be effects of God’s creative act.   265A student of this mystery, a doctor of great skill,Is our Husāmu-’d-Dīn, whose praises books would fill. 
The lion, now enraged with hunger’s gnawing pain,Perceived the hare was coming, bounding o’er the plain.All carelessly, in confidence, he frisking came,The lion all the while growled, gnashed his teeth from shame.No consciousness of fault was visible, no fear;But confidence, sure sign his conscience he felt clear. 
When he’d reached hearing range, the lion him addressedIn tones of wrath: “Thou demon, insolent, possessed!   270Know I’m a lion; elephants my prey I make.The tigers, spotted pards, by me are caused to quake.A petty hare am not I, slighted thus to be,Or see my just dominion spurned by likes of thee.Cast off assumed prim innocence, awake to fact;Thou hear’st the lion’s roar; forget not thus the pact.” 
The hare replied: “Gramercy! Hear my poor excuse.Let me explain. Your Majesty will ne’er refuse.” 
The lion now: “Excuse? Thou basest of the base!Is this the time to pay thy court? A pretty case!   275Unseasonably crowing cock art thou! Reprieved?Excuse from simpleton can never be received.A simpleton’s excuse is worse than was his fault.Excuse of ignorance were science to assault.Excuse from thee, thou hare, were quite devoid of sense.Take thou me not for hare; with me strive not to fence.” 
The hare to him: “O prince! Have pity on the weak!Lend ear unto the tales of them who justice seek. 
Thankoffering let it be for thy august estate.280   Poor supplicant like me, thou’lt not drive from thy gate.Great river like, thy boons stream aye through all canals;Each flower that decks thy hair in price rich pearls excels.The sea is not dried up by yielding showers of rain.Thy ease will not decrease by lessening of my pain.” 
The lion then: “My clemency I show to thoseWho’ve it deserved. ’Tis stature rules the length of clothes.” 
The hare: “Give ear. Should I of grace unworthy prove,I’m at thy feet. My life is thine, I cannot move.At morning’s early hour I set out for thy court.285   Companion had I with me. True, the way is short.That second hare I speak of, food was for thy maw;By lot selected, as the pact lays down the law.Upon the road, a lion on us onslaught made.The savage, strange invader, rendered us afraid.I remonstrated with him; told him our intent;Said we were coming here; by treaty were we sent. 
He answered: ‘Prate not to me. Treaty such as thisNo value has. I’m king. He a usurper is.Thy paltry king and thee I’ll quickly rend in two,290   If thou and thy companion will not with me go.’I craved of him permission, him to leave awhile,Till I could come and tell thee of his claim and guile.He granted leave; but kept my fellow as a pledge;Saying otherwise he’d kill me, as his privilege.We strove to coax and pacify the sturdy brute.’Twas no avail. My mate he’d keep; me he’d depute.My comrade three times was in bulk more full than I;More plump, more sleek, more toothful. Dare I tell a lie?Henceforward, through that lion, who can come this way?295   The case is so. I’ve told thee truly all my say. 
From hence, for evermore, thy ration’s lost, forsooth.The truth I speak to thee. Unpleasant oft is truth.Wouldst thou thy ration have, arise and clear the way.Come on. I’ll guide. Let’s see, then, who shall win the day.” 
The lion now: “In God’s name! Come! Where is the beast?Go thou before, if thou speak truth. Take heed at least.I’ll treat him as he merits, and a hundred such.But should this prove a lie, thou’lt rue it very much.” 
The hare set out in front, so acting as a guide,That he might lead the lion as he should decide.   300A well there was not far off, which the hare had seen.This pit he destined for the lion’s last death-scene.They journeyed thus, the two, towards the well in haste,The scheming, plotting hare’s fell stratagem to taste. 
A stream of water freely bears the chaff away;But how it undermines a mountain’s hard to say.All single-handed, Moses, — Red Sea at command, — Can drown pursuing Pharaoh’s vast ungodly band.A gnat, by God’s behest, a Nimrod may annul;Its feeble wings may burst the sutures of his skull.   305 
The doom of him who acts on what a foe adjusts,Is like the end of one his envier who trusts.The punishment of Pharaoh’s listening to Haman, Resembles Nimrod’s, who faith pinned upon Satan. 
A foe who talks in friendly guise, a false game plays;He vaunts the bait; but be thou sure, a trap he lays.His proffered sugarcandy poison will conceal.His seeming kindly offices are treachery’s veil. 
Should God ordain thy fall, thy sight will blinded be;310   ‘Twixt friend and foe the difference thou’lt fail to see.Since thus it is, betimes betake thyself to prayer;Fast, supplicate, entreat thee gracious God to spare.Thus pray: “O Thou, to whom all secrets well are known,Crush not Thy trusting servant ‘neath sore trial’s stone.If doglike acts I’ve acted, Thou who lions formest,O let not loose upon me lions Thou informest.O Lord of mercy, Pardoner of sin, All-just,Upon me vengeance wreak not, or succumb I must.Cause not Thy pleasant waters me to burn like fire;315   Let not the fiery furnace form of stream acquire.If Thou me madden with the vials of dismay,Thou’lt make nonentities the parts of things to play.” 
What’s madness? ’Tis a bandage to the eye of faith.A stone we see as pearl, an island as a frith.What’s madness? False to judge of every stick and straw.To seek the violet’s perfume in hip and haw. 
One day, when Solomon a camp had formed afield,The birds all flocked around him, homage due to yield.They found he spake their language, all their secrets knew.320   With pleasure, birds of every kind about him flew.The birds with Solomon all left their twit-twit-twee,And spake a tongue articulate; as one might see. 
Synglottism is a link, a very potent spell; Among mere strangers, man’s a captive in a cell.How many Turks and Hindūs synglottise with us;How many pairs of each are strange as incubus!A synglottist is then a man’s another self;But syncardism, than synglottism’s much closer, elf. 
Besides our words, our signs, our written characters,From hearts, there rise by hundreds mute interpreters.   325 
The birds about their secrets one by one communed;About their knowledge, sciences, and voices tuned.To pay their court to Solomon their notes they raised;Revealed their capabilities; skill of each praised.Not out of pride and vanity; excess ’twould seem;But solely to please Solomon, gain his esteem. 
So slaves that seek for favour at a master’s handExert themselves to name the talents they command.But if they feel ashamed of one would them purchase,Straightway they’re sick, halt, deaf, or something still more base.   330 
The turn then came for hoopoe’s setting forth his skill,To say what he could do, what office he could fill.Said he: “O King, one little talent’s all I own.I’ll tell it in few words; succinctness is a crown.” 
Said Solomon: “Let’s hear it. What then is thy skill?”The hoopoe answered: “This. — I perch where’er I will.From my seat I look down like plumbline on the ground,And see if hidden water under it is found;Where is it; at what depth; what are its qualities;Whence takes its rise; from rock, sand, clay’s varieties.   335O Solomon, whene’er thou send’st thy armies forth,Me call to mind; my skill is surely notice worth.” 
To him replied then Solomon: “Esteemed good friend,Thee I will name Purveyor-General on land.Whene’er my troops go forth, through sandy deserts sent,With them thou’lt journey; so, ne’er will be water scant.” 
The crow on hearing this with jealousy was stung.Addressing Solomon, he said: “This bird a lie has sung. 
His insolence is great to boast thus to the king.340   Such falsehood’s quite disgusting. Who’s heard such a thing?Had he possessed this very wonderful insight,Would he be caught in springes barely out of sight?He cannot see those traps beneath a little mound;So caught he is, and caged. High dudgeon thence is found.” 
Said Solomon: “O hoopoe, true is this remark.A gulp of vanity has set thee raving, stark.How is it thou’rt so tipsy early in the day,To come and prate of things so far out of the way?” 
The hoopoe then replied: “Great King, against poor me,345   For love of God, believe not all my foes’ false plea.If untruth I have spoken, — cannot prove my tale, — I cast myself before thee; kill me without fail.The crow denies the rule of Providence on earth;With all his cunning, he’s a miscreant from birth.” 
Of miscreants’ defects, if any one in usExist, it’s sure to spread, — a plague-spot cancerous. 
A snare man may detect in every lust of flesh,If God’s decree will not he fall into its mesh.By God’s decree our reason ceases clear to see,350   As moon, when darkened all, can hide the sun from me.Whoever dares deny God’s ruling providence,’Tis Providence decrees his blindness, want of sense. 
The Father of Mankind, Lord Nomenclator first, In every nerve possess’d a vein of knowledge nursed.He knew the names of all things, right, without default.From first to last his mind could hold them from revolt.Whatever name he gave, that name endured unchanged.If he said: “This thing’s active,” slothful it ne’er ranged. 
He knew at first who was believer in God’s word.He from the first, too, knew the miscreant toward his Lord.   355 
From one who knows them well, of things seek thou the fames,And mystery of the symbol: “God taught him the names.” The name of everything, with us, is what it seems;With God, the name of everything, what He it deems.By Moses was his staff a simple rod proclaimed;By its Creator, God, a dragon was it named.‘Umer idolater was classed by each array;God him believer called upon creation’s day.What is by man termed seed upon this transient heath,Impressed by God was with the seal: “Father of death.”   360In realm of nullity that seed received a form,Existent with its God; nor less, nor more; a worm.Result thereof sprung forth the essence of our nameWith the Creator, who will be our final aim.He each one names according to his last estate,Not with respect to that which is but passing fate. 
So soon as mind of man with light has gained its strength,It spies the soul, and mysteries of every name, at length.When man perceives therein the kingdom of truth’s rays,He falls in adoration, worships, spends his days.   365That Adam’s praise, whose blessed name we’re proud to bear, Should I recite till judgment-day, would not end there. 
Decree of Providence so willed, with all his lore,One single prohibition known, cost him right sore.He asked: “Was prohibition laid, joy to prevent;Or can, by gloss, evasion unto it be lent?” 
To his mind, explanation having been inferred,His appetites, perplexed, to taste the wheat preferred. A thorn the foot of Eden’s gardener thus rent.370   A thief the chance perceived, the garden robbed, and went.Amazement o’er, the gardener’s himself again. He saw the thief had carried off th’ unguarded train.He sobbed aloud: “My God, I’ve deeply sinned;” and sighed:“A darkness came, and from the road I turn’d aside.” 
Decree of God was thus a cloud the sun to veil.A lion, dragon, were a mouse beneath that bale.When judgment’s needed, should I not detect a snare,Not I alone am blind, my weakness others share.Blest he, whose steadfast feet have never gone astray!375   Who waywardness has shunned, and taught his tongue to pray! 
Should God’s decree encompass thee with blackest night,The same decree will readily help set thee right.Should Providence at times thy life to menace seem,’Twas Providence that gave it, can prolong its gleam.Should life’s events appear to threaten every way,God can in heaven prepare a home for thee to stay.What ’tis thou tremblest at, a special favour count,Designed to bring thee safe to Zion’s holy mount. 
And now we turn again from morals, — they’ve no end, — 380   To see how fares it with our lion and his friend. 
They came to where the well was. Here the lion sawThe hare his pace had slackened, backward ‘gan to draw. 
At this he remonstrated: “What art thou about!Come forward still. The enemy we must find out.” 
The hare replied: “I have no power to move a foot.From fear I faint. I tremble; courage has ebbed out.Thou seest how pale my face; like ashes I’ve become;An indication sure of fear, most troublesome.God hath the countenance the mind’s true index named.The adept keeps his eye on countenance enchained.   385A face’s colour tell-tale is, like tinkling bell.A horse’s neigh of other steeds’ approach will tell.A sound from anything attention brings to pass;’Tis thus we know the creak of door from bray of ass.The Prophet said, no point of character t’ asperse:‘Enigma is a man until he’s heard converse.’The colour in man’s face makes known how stands the heart.Compassion take on me; thy sympathy impart.Enjoyments sensual give man a rosy face;The fame of pale-faced men reports good sense and grace.   390I feel within me what makes all my joints seem weak;It’s borne away my colour, strength, and power to speak.It casts down whomsoe’er it chances to attack;As tempest uproots trees it meets upon its track.I’m subjected to that by which both men and beastsAre turned to stocks and stones; — to say the very least.They are but parts; that thing a universal is.It makes men’s faces pale; gives ashiness where ’tis;As long as nature mournful is, or full of glee; — As long as fields now verdant, naked then we see.   395The sun each morning rises, joying in his course;At eve sinks down again, and goes from bad to worse.The planets circulating, each within its sphere,Are subject to immersion when the sun they near.The moon in splendour far excels each tiny star. 
But near its change it dwindles almost to a hair.The very earth, that in firm steadfastness doth sit,When subject to an earthquake, shakes as in a fit.How many regions in the world, encroaching sands400   Have changed from gardens into bare and sterile lands.The air, that with its breezes gives new life to all,When Providence ordains, brings pestilence and thrall.Sweet water’s running stream, a very source of life,In pond confined, turns fetid, black, and poison-rife.The fire, so arrogant when fed with breezes long,With one puff is extinguished by a breath too strong.The sea, now boisterous with waves and swelling tide,At times is like a mirror, shrinking from land’s side.The sky, revolving night and day, is never still;405   The seven planets like, it works its Maker’s will.Those planets, too, in apogee and perigee, — what not, — Auspicious, inauspicious are in several lot.Thyself consider; — little part, of universals mixed; — And thou’lt divine the state of all extended, fixed.Since universals are by no means free from toil,How should a petty part escape from trouble’s moil?A part, too, that’s compound of every opposite, — Of fire, and air, and water; adding earth its mite.If sheep from wolf should flee, there’s really wonder none;410   To see them herd together ‘d ‘stonish every one.Life springs from concord of th’ ingredient opposites.And death results when discord their pact disunites.God’s mercy hath appointed every lion’s mate;And unto each wild ass a fit associate.But since the world in trouble prison-like offends,What wonder that all’s transient, — that all suffering ends?” 
’Twas thus the hare the lion tricked with specious lies;And added: “Hence the reason why I cannot rise.” 
The lion answered: “I see naught to cause thy fear.Point out to me the object seems to thee so drear.”   415 
The hare then: “In this well thy foe takes his repose.His stronghold is this pit, where he’s secure from woes.A wise man hides himself at bottom of a well;For ’tis in solitude heart’s choicest raptures dwell.Seclusion’s gloom is easier borne than wrongs from men.Who craves a victor’s mercy, saves his life just then.” 
The lion muttered: “Onward come. My arm is strong.Go look. At home is he? He’ll not live long.”The hare: “Alas! Already I’ve endured his gaze.Take me unto thy breast. My mind is all amaze.   420From off thy back, most potent lord and prince,I’ll look down in the well. I’ll neither blink nor wince.” 
The lion took him on his back without more fuss.So, under this protection to the well went puss.They both looked down; and in the water thereReflection shadowed forth a lion and a hare.The lion saw his own shape in the water shine:“Another lion,” thought he, “with fat hare on chine.”His foe he fancied, thus, that in the well he’d spied.The hare he set down safely; in leapt he with pride.   425 
He thus fell in the pit he had for others dug.Iniquity will visit those who drink out of her mug.Iniquity’s a pit into which tyrants fall.Such is the firm conviction of our wise men all.The wickeder a man, the deeper does he sink.So justice wills; and so, the wrong’d will doubtless think. 
O thou who in thy might injustice dost commit,For thy own self a pit thou diggest; our tale to wit.Thou weavest round thyself a web, as does silkworm;Thou’lt not escape unless to justice thou conform.   430 
Look not upon the weak as quite without a friend.Reflect; ’tis said: “When God’s help comes.” Where’s then thy end?If thou’rt an elephant in strength, the weak will fleeTo his Protector. Then the Lord’s wrath shalt thou see.Whenever wrong’s weak victim on his God doth call,A clamour rises from the ranks in heaven’s hall.If with his blood, in pride, thou stain thy teeth just now,The toothache shall avenge him; dentist’s victim thou. 
The lion saw himself reflected in the well.435   Through blindest rage himself from foe he could not tell.He thought his own reflection was his hated foe,And slew himself while seeking on him to work woe. 
So tyrant, when thou seest injustice in the world,Thyself behold. Those deeds thy banner have unfurled.Thine are included with them in God’s just decree.Thy rage, greed, lust’s reward most certainly thou’lt see.They are thy very self; in them thou art condemned.Thou judgest them; in selfsame manner thou’rt contemned.In thy own acts thou seest not the sin thou work’st;440   Or otherwise thy own self’s foe thou’dst be from first.It is thyself against whom thou mak’st thy attack;Just as the lion took the hare upon his back.If thou’d sound deep to bottom of the moral well.Thyself thou’dst find there; thy own acts would plainly tell. 
The lion at the bottom found out who was there.Let him as likeness serve of many who are here.Whoe’er beats out the teeth of weaker than himself,Commits the lion’s error; — springs upon himself. 
O thou who loath’st a mole upon thy neighbour’s cheek,445   Reflect. ’Tis but an image. Thy own features seek. 
Believers are as mirrors; each sees self in each.So said the Prophet. His words to us truth may teach. 
Thou wearest spectacles, of blue, or red, or green;And thence thou judgest all is tinged with that sheen.If thou wilt use a window glazed with coloured glass,Thou may’st expect the sun will seem of that same class.If thou’rt not mad, thou’lt know the colour is thy own.Thyself call evil. Henceforth others leave alone. 
Believers see with eye of faith the light of God.How else to them were visible all things’ synod?   450If thou examine things with hell-fire in thy heart,How canst thou see distinct the good and bad apart.Seek by degrees to drown that fire in holy light.So shalt thou, sinner, soon, thy weakness change for might. 
And do Thou, Lord, asperge from mercy’s cleansing stream,To change the fire of sin to light of faith supreme.The ocean’s waters are a mere drop in Thy hand;The streams of mercy, fire of wrath, at Thy command.If Thou so will, the fire a pleasant stream may be.And at Thy word, a lake a fiery pit we’d see.   455From Thee spring our devotions, supplications, prayers.’Tis Thou deliverest the victims from their slayers.Without our supplication, Thou entreaty gayest.The stores of Thy great mercy for all men Thou savest. 
The hare, for his deliverance, jubilant set out,To join his fellows, scattered in their homes about.He saw the lion prone at bottom of the well;Then rapidly went back his stratagem to tell.He clapped his hands for joy at his escape from death,Exuberant as plant sprouts from the earth beneath.   460Its stalk and leaf break forth from prison underground.It rears itself apace, makes friends with th’ air around. 
The leaves burst from the stem, and spread themselves abroad;Until by growth a tree, whose grace all men applaud.It now expands in thanks for favours of the Lord;Each leaf, flower, fruit intones a hymn of praise, like bard.“Thou, Giver of all good things, nourishedst my root.And madest me become a strongly growing shoot.” 
Our souls, shut up in prison in our frames of clay,465   So break forth into raptures when they’re called away.They dance for very joy, from love of God All-wise,When, like full moon perfected, they in glory rise.Material beings, thus, their dance perform, and souls.Ask not of them the subject of their hyperboles. 
The hare had lodged the lion in a dungeon safe.More shame for lion was it, hare should make him chafe.Just so a shame it is, and subject for surprise,The state in which he’s left, who Fakhru-’d-Dīn would rise. O, he’s a lion, sure, at bottom of a well.470   His pride of flesh the hare that cast him down to hell.His pride, the hare, at large, disporting as it will;Himself down in the pit. O, what a bitter pill! 
The lion-slaying hare now scampered to his friends,Exclaiming: “Good news bring I; let joy know no endsGood news! Good news! Festivities bring into play!The hell-cat’s gone to hell, from which he came our way.Good news! Good news! That foe to all our lives, and peace.Has had his teeth extracted, through our Maker’s grace.He who so many crushed with paw of tyranny,475   Like rubbish has been swept by death’s broom clean away.” 
A convocation now was held by all the beasts,Hilarity and joy enlivened all their breasts.About the hare, as candle, they, moths-like, all flocked.All their respects presented; none were found who mocked.They all declared: “Thou art an angel by heaven sent(Angel of death, however, he to lion went).Whatever thou may’st be, our souls thy sacrifice!Thou’st triumphed. For such prowess praise will not suffice.Our God it was endowed thee with such wondrous skill.May God be praised! Deliverance is by His will.   480Pray, tell us all about it. How was such thing done?How couldst thou compass to deceive th’ experienced drone?Relate in full. ‘Twill comfort give to all our souls.Detail the facts; balm will they be for bygone doles.Recount at length; for, ah, how many tyranniesDid we not suffer from him, who now stark dead lies!” 
Quoth he: “Most venerable Sirs! God’s grace did all.What could a hare accomplish without Him at call?He strength of purpose gave me, light from heaven above.That light it was that nerved me in my every move.   485God granteth crowning grace, to further cause of truth,’Tis God also who sends vicissitudes on earth.He, ’tis, alternately, who parties makes prevail.Now mere opinionists, now men of light avail.If then, in turn, thou now thyself find uppermost,Why let hypocrisy, presumption, make thee boast?” 
Joy not o’er great prosperity. It does not last.Airs give not thou thyself; thou’rt but a passing guest.They whose eternal kingship lasts beyond all times, Who sing God’s praise beyond the seven spheres and climes,   490 
They more endure than transient reigns of kings’ short rolls.They are the never-failing feeders of men’s souls. 
If thou the pleasures of the world short time forego,Eternal bliss may compensate th’ imbroglio.Know that this nether world but for a period lasts.T’ abandon it, eternal rest to man forecasts.Give ear. Forsake all mundane ease, all earthly rest;Then will thy soul enjoy heaven’s cup with double zest.Cast thou the carcase vile of earthly pomp to dogs.495   The cup of mere surmise reject; the soul it clogs. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





VI. The Greater (Spiritual) Warfare 
Great Princes all! We’ve killed our dread external foe.Within us, still, a worse than he remains, I trow.To slay this inner foe is not the task of mind;Our moral lion’s not destroyed by tricks refined. 
Our flesh, a hell; that hell a fiery dragon is.Whole oceans can’t extinguish those fierce flames of his.Earth’s seven oceans all were lost within his maw;His raging fires would still burn high, to mankind’s awe.Pitcoal, hard-hearted miscreants; these are its food; They sink within it, miserable, abject brood.   5Withal, its craving hunger ne’er will be appeased,Until the voice of God cry unto it: “Art eased?”“Eased?” will it answer; “No; not yet awhile by far;Behold my flame, my fury, — burning, fiery roar.”It swallows down a universe in its fell mood;And instantly shrieks out: “More food! More food! More food!”God, from nubiquity, His foot will stamp on hell.Then will it cease to burn: “He willed, and it befell!” 
Our fleshly lusts in us are but a part of hell;Parts have the qualities of their universal.   10 
The foot of God alone can stamp out hell’s alarms.Who else but God supreme to bend such bow has arms?Straight arrows serve alone to be shot from a bow;But lust’s distorted spring shoots crooked arrows too.Be thou in mind upright as arrow straight for bow.A bow will not shoot straight, unless the arrow’s so. 
We’ve fought our fight and conquered in our outward strife.Now turn we our attention to the inner life.We’ve done with outer warfare, lesser as it is;15   And as the Prophet, wage the greater warfare, his.We put our trust in God; from Him we ask for aid;With His assistance faith can move a mountain staid.To rout an armed foe is nothing very fresh;A lion true is he who conquers his own flesh.To illustrate this truth, give ear unto a tale,That thou of these few words the moral mayest inhale. 
From Cæsar an ambassador to ‘Umer came, Through deserts far-extending, from Madīna’s fame. He asked?” Where is the palace of the Caliph, men; 20   That I to it may lead my cavalcade, my train?”The people answered: “Thou’lt no Caliph’s palace find,Our Caliph’s sole pavilion’s his enlightened mind.Through his ‘Commandership’ his fame to Rome has come; But like our other poor, a hut’s his ample home.How shouldst thou see that palace, brother, stranger, guest,When in thy mind’s eye thou a beam hast, unconfessed?Cast out that beam; make clear thy eye from every mote;Then mayst thou entertain the hope to see his cote.” 
Whoever shall his heart cleanse from all passions’ bale,Will soon perceive therein a court and presence hale.   25When Ahmed’s heart was cleansed of evil’s fire and smoke, Whichever way he turned, God’s countenance bespoke. So long as man keeps company with evil thought,How can he understand God’s countenance in aught?He that a window’s pierced from heart towards heaven’s recess,Sees in each mote a ray from Sun of Righteousness. God shines apparent in the midst of other things,As moon in majesty among the stars’ twinklings. 
Place thou two finger-tips upon thy two eyeballs.What seest thou now of all the world? Darkness befalls.   30Thou seest it not; but that the world exists, thou’lt trust.Our vices are the finger-tips of fleshly lust.Thy finger-tips remove; instanter, as before,Thou lookest around and seest whate’er thou wilt explore.His people asked of Noah where righteousness might be.He said: “Lo, there! With muffled heads you cannot see.You’ve wrapped your cloaks in folds about your heads and eyes.Your sense of sight cannot see what before you lies.” 
The world’s eye man is; all the rest’s mere skin and shell.A real eye’s he who strives his “Friend” to see right well.   35Unless we see our Friend, ‘twere better we were blind,A friend that is not constant’s better out of mind. 
When Rome’s ambassador had heard those words so wise, His eager curiosity began to rise. 
He sought for ‘Umer with redoubled zeal and zest;But in so doing lost his horse, and eke his chest.He wandered everywhere to seek the Caliph out.Like one distracted asked each passer-by his route.“Is’t possible,” he said, “that such a man there be,40   When like the soul to sight invisible is he?” 
He sought for him as though he ‘d been his truant slave,But: “He who seeks shall find” ‘s a very well-known stave.A desert-Arab woman saw he at the last,Who told him ‘Umer, then, beneath date-palm slept fast.Beneath a date-palm! Far from mankind’s busy plod.That date-palm’s shadow shaded the Shadow of God! 
He went towards the tree; a station took afar;He saw ‘Umer; a fit of trembling showed his fear.On that ambassador did awe and dread alight.45   While o’er his heart there stole a sense of sweet delight.Two feelings, love and dread, by nature opposites,Were mingled in his bosom by some occult rites.He thought within himself: “I’ve many princes seen;In sovereign presence I have ever welcome been.This fit of awe and trembling’s very strange to me;And yet without dismay this man I cannot see.I’ve been in forests where the lions make their lair;I’ve met them face to face; yet knew not what was fear.In battle I’ve been, oft; in thickest of the fight.50   My arm’s upheld our cause, when in most desperate plight.Wounds have I dealt, received, that threatened life to take,Among the brave, the bravest; my heart knew no quake.This man is weaponless, supine upon the ground.Why then this tremor? It my every limb has bound.A ghostly awe is this; it’s not a mortal fear.Most certainly it’s not a dread of this man here. 
He who fears God has admonition of the Lord;Both men and demons stand in awe of his mere word.”Mute he remained in reverential attitude,Till ‘Umer woke from his trance of beatitude.   55 
Profound obeisance and grave salutation made,As said the Prophet: “First, salute; then, embassade.”The Caliph answered: “And on thee be peace! Draw near;”Assured him of protection; bade him put off fear.“Fear not” a word of comfort is to trembling soul;A generous tribute ’tis, when strong with weak condole.Men set at ease the object whom they wish to raise, — Relieve his heart from palpitation; bid fears cease.But unto one who feals no dread how say: “Fear not “?What lesson’s this thou givest to one whose lesson’s got?   60 
So ‘Umer put at ease that much perturbed man;And calmed his wavering mind, as noble hearts best can.To him he then addressed some subtle words of sense,Set forth the attributes of God, — man’s best defence,Declared the goodness of the Lord to all who trustIn Him alone; the rank they gain in trance combust. 
Saint’s ecstasy springs from a glimpse of God, his pride.His station’s that of intimate. He’s bridegroom; God is bride. A bride’s veiled graces are not seen by groom alone;Her unveiled charms solely to him in private shown.   65In state she first appears before the people all;Her veil removed, the groom alone is at her call.Entranced are many Gnostic worshippers, I ween;Few gain admission to the presence-chamber scene. 
‘Umer told all the stations passed through by his soul; — Its flights, fights, tribulations, ere it was made whole.He spoke of times when flight of time’s of no account;Of Holiness’s station, glorious to recount.He talked of atmospheres in which his righteous soul70   Had soared to seek fresh conquests of devotion’s whole.Its every flight had been beyond th’ horizon scant;Beyond the hope, or e’en desire, of aspirant. 
He found a willing list’ner in the stranger guest,Whose mind was framed t’ investigate such mysteries blest.The teacher was perfection; novice full of zeal;Like clever jockey on a steed with lightning heel.He found his scholar apt, of great capacity.So good seed sowed in fertile soil sagacity. 
Th’ ambassador now asked: “Of true believers Prince!75   How can a soul from heaven come down to earth’s province; — How can so great a bird be cooped up in a cage?” 
He answered: “God speaks words of power, most sage.Those words, addressed to nothings without eyes or ears,Set them in motion. Like a ferment, fruit it bears.Those words no sooner spoken, quick those nothings allIn motion put themselves, and reach existence’ hall.Or He commands these beings, creatures of His own;And they return to nothing, whence He them had drawn.He speaks unto the flowers; they forthwith burst in bloom.80   His voice the flint hears; lo, it’s a cornelian stone.A spell He laid on matter; spirit it became.By charm from Him the sun sprang forth, a lambent flame.If He but whisper words of awe, the sun againIs seized with darkness of eclipse, like night amain.What is’t He says, by which the teeming eye of cloudSheds forth its tears, as drops from water-skin unsewed? 
What incantation to the earth addresses He,To make it produce cattle, — whose hides used may be?The hesitations of each puzzled child of thoughtArise from some enigma by which God’s him caught.   85On horns of a dilemma is he fixed, poor man.‘Shall I do this,’ says he, ‘when ‘ts opposite I can?’From God, too, is the power to make selection’s choiceOf two solutions. One is taken, through inward voice.Wouldst thou be always free from hesitation, fool?Stuff not thy mind’s ear tight with doubt’s dull cotton-wool;That thou mayst solve the riddles God may set for thee; — That thou mayst understand the full of mercy free.Then shall thy heart receive His inspiration’s gift, — A power of speaking from an inward impulse’ drift.   90The ear and eye of soul are organs not of sense;The ears of sense and mind are not like soul’s, intense.The word “compulsion” puts me out of humour quite.Who hath not love of God, compulsion’s slave’s, by right.This union’s based on truth (compulsion is too proud);It is a glimpse of sunshine breaking through a cloud.Be it compulsion. Man’s compulsion it is not; — Not the compulsion of browbeating from a sot.Compulsion’s felt by them, my very worthy friend,Whose eyes of faith, ope’d in their hearts, on God attend.   95The absent and the future patent are to them;To speak about the past is what they most contemn.Election and compulsion, theirs, are not the same.As dewdrops in the oyster-shell rare pearls became. Outside, they’re dewdrops, solely, whether great or small;Inside they’re pearls of price, whose value knows no fall.Such men by nature are just like the musk-deer’s pod;It’s fed with blood of artery, musk it yields, through God. 
Ask not how ’tis that outward blood can change like this;100   Becoming musk when in the pod secreted ’tis.Ask not how copper vile, by wise alchemist’s art,Is changed to gold when solved by elixir in part. Election and compulsion, fancies both, in thee;But when by saints they’re viewed, God’s glory may they be.Upon the table, bread’s a lifeless, senseless mass;When taken in man’s mouth, the soul it joins, in class.On table transubstantiation takes not place; The soul it is transforms it, nourished by God’s grace.Such is the soul’s great power; most perspicacious man,105   So long as that soul life and power retain can.A human being, mass of mingled flesh and blood,Moved by the Lord, can cleave hill, dale, mine, and sea’s flood.The strength of strongest man can merely split a stone; The Power that informs man’s soul can cleave the moon. If man’s heart but untie the mouth of mystery’s sack,His soul soon soars aloft beyond the starry track.If heaven’s mystery divulged should, ‘haps, become,The whole world ’twould burn up, as fire doth wood consume.” 
Let’s contemplate the acts of God, the deeds of men;110   Know, men’s deeds do exist. This truth is patent, then.If men’s deeds be not in this nether world of ours,Say not thou unto others: “Why these deeds of yours?”God’s act it is through which those deeds of ours arise;Our acts are but the sequels of God’s agencies. 
The letter, or the spirit, ’tis, our reason weighs.But both at once it cannot comprehend always. 
Examining the spirit, letter we neglect;At one time forwards, backwards we cannot prospect.If thou straight forward look at any point of time,Thou canst not backwards see, whatever be the clime.   115Our souls not taking in the letter, spirit too,How could they e’er create these predicates, one, two?God comprehendeth all things; — all things doth ensue;One act’s no hindrance, with Him, other acts to do. 
The reason Satan gave: “Since Thou hast tempted me,” The scheming demon strove to hide his sin, we see.His trespass Adam owned: “Against ourselves we’ve sinned.” God’s act he, like as we, then left not out of mind.Through shame the act of Satan Adam secret kept.Self-accusation’s fruit, in consequence, he reaped.   120Repentance shown by Adam, God in mercy said:“In thee ’twas I created, sin thou hast displayed.Was it not My decree and providence that thou,In asking pardon, shouldst the tempter disavow?”Said Adam: “Thee I feared; most bitter shame I felt.”God added: “It was I who gave thee shame heartfelt.” 
Consideration he who shows considered is;So he who brings the sugar, share of cake is his.For whom, then, benefits, but practisers of good? Keep pleased thy friend. Offend him; see what ensue would.   125One sole example study, — instance of this law, — Compulsion and election’s difference to draw.“There is a hand that shakes from palsy or from fear.Another hand also thou shakest when thou’rt near.Know: God it is creates the movement in them both; 
And yet there’s no resemblance in their motions loth.Thou’rt sorry that thou shakedst that man’s hand anon,When thou seest him annoyed at what thou’st just now done.” 
A question ’tis of judgment; judgment shrewdness is,130   Until some weakness intervene to mar all this.A question, now, of judgment as to corals, pearls,Is not the same as one about the soul, you churls.A question of the soul’s another matter quite;The wine that feeds the soul comes not from grapes, black, white. 
When any matter is a question of judgment,‘Umer with Abū-Jahl’s in one predicament.‘Umer gave up his judgment; rested on his soul.‘Bū-Jahl received this name through lack of self-control. In sense and reason Abū-Jahl a master was;135   But as to soul, in ignorance he fell, alas!Of sense and reason questions are cause and effect;But miracles and wonders show soul is a fact.Enlightenment of soul, whatever it may see.By quibbles of school logic cannot silenced be. 
We now return again our tale to take in hand,Though certainly we’ve never left it out of mind. 
In ignorance, our souls are in God’s prison chained.In wisdom, by God’s help, their liberty’s regained.In sleep, God’s lethargy it is in which we sink.140   Awake, we’re in God’s hands, whatever we may think.In weeping, we are clouds from which His mercy flows.In laughter, we’re the flash with which His lightning glows. 
In anger, we’re reflections of the wrath of God.In amity, the mirrors of His favour’s nod.What are we in this world? All tortuous and bent.There is not one upright, straightforward, innocent. 
Cæsar’s ambassador no sooner ‘Umer heard,Than light broke on his heart; at which he stroked his beard.All questions and all answers from his mind went quite;All sense of right and wrong had vanished front his sight.   145He’d found the source; what need, then, of the streams?To gather further wisdom, pondering on the means,He said: “‘Umer, pray tell me what’s the end and useOf shutting up that thing of light in darkness’ house?How can clear water be expected from black mud?Why then is the pure soul combined with flesh and blood?”He answered: “Most important question hast thou raised.A sense, a spirit, by the letter paraphrased.The free, the jocund spirit prisoner thou’st made;As though the mind, the air, could into letter fade.   150Thou hast done this for explanation’s sake, — Thou, who beyond the explanation place wouldst take.How should the man in whom the explanation’s gleamed,Not yet distinguish what’s to me so clearly beamed?Ten thousand explanations are there, each of whichIs most momentous, — than ten thousand others, rich.With that, thy speech, now compoundly particular,A universal explanation were, — no bar.Thou art a partial, — seekest explanation still;Why set thyself, then, to deny th’ universal?   155Unless thy speech contain some use, propound it not;And if it have, objection quit; give what thou’st got. 
Thanks are incumbent upon every mortal’s head;Contention and sour looks are surely no one’s bread.If to put on sour looks, of thankfulness sign be,Then vinegar the sweetest-spoken thing we’d see.If vinegar desire to hearts a way to find,It oxymel becomes, with honey sweet combined.True, verse is not best vehicle for sense abstract.160   It’s like a sling; one’s never certain how ‘t will act.” 
Th’ ambassador his senses lost with this one cupOf wine spiritual. His mission he gave up.O’erwhelmed with wonder at the power of God, he fell.He came ambassador; now sovereign was, as well. 
A river overflooded constitutes a lake.Some grains, when sown in earth, a field of corn can make.When eaten, bread assimilated is by man,That bread inanimate takes life, and reason can.When wood or candle is made victim unto fire,165   Its substance dark becomes a source of light entire.Black stibium, a stone, when placed in human eye,Expands the power of vision, objects can descry.Good luck to him who’s saved from his own fleshly self,And has become a parcel of some living elf.Alas for him, who, living, sits among the dead.He’s dead himself, his life from out of him has fled. 
If thou take refuge in the Qur’ān, God’s own book,With spirit of Muhammed thou’lt soon exchange look.The Qur’ān is the essence of all prophets right.170   They were the whales who swam in ocean of God’s might.If thou canst read or not, the Qur’ān take to heart,The saints and prophets study; they were as thou art.Read thou it carefully; read, mark, digest its tales;Thy soul, like bird in cage, will long to break its rails. 
The bird shut up, imprisoned in a little cage,That seeks not to get out, is ignorant, not sage. 
The souls who’ve freed themselves from cages of the flesh,Are worthy fellow-travellers with prophets, fresh.Their voices they lift up, religion to impart:“The way of sure deliverance is here. Take heart!   175Religion hath us saved from fleshly cages, sure.No other way is there, salvation to secure.You then upon yourselves will chastisements inflict,That you may be delivered from the world’s respect.” 
Respect of mortal man a heavy fetter is;Within religion’s path the gravest bond is this.Consider well this tale, ingenuous young friend;   179‘Twill teach thee many lessons may thy morals mend. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





VII. The Merchant and the Parrot 
A merchant there was, who a parrot did own;Confined in a cage, wisest bird in the town.This merchant to journeying made up his mindTo fair Hindūstān, there some rich wares to find.From generous motives, to each of his slaves,To male, and to female, some gift to bring craves.He made them all tell him what best they would like;And promised to bring it, most gentlemanlike.He said to the parrot: “Poll! Poll! With the rest,5   From Hind I must bring thee what thou mayst like best.” 
The parrot replied: “Sure, thou’lt see parrots there,To them pray impart how it is that I fare.Inform them, a parrot who loves them all well,By thee’s kept confined, close shut up in a cell.He sends you his love, and his very best wish;Desiring from you wise advice, parrotish.He fears he may pine, through longing to seeHis dear absent friends, — die in foreign countree.He asks if it is altogether thing fit,10   That he should be caged, while you on the trees sit.If this is the way in which true friends should act;Leave him in his cage, while you forests affect.He wishes you’d call to your mind your lost friend,When drinking your bumpers, ere fieldward you wend. 
’Tis sweet to be thought of by far-away dame,One’s sweetheart, whose love’s set one’s heart in a flame.While you are disporting with those you love best,He’s eating his heart out; grief gives him no rest.One bumper you’ll drink for the love of poor Poll, If only you wish him your love to extol.   15Or, thinking of him who’s in slavery kept,Your bowl’s whole contents dash to earth, as though wept.O where is the promise, and where is the oath,Th’ engagements sworn to him by sugarsome tooth? If absence of his came from truancy’s pranks,You’ve set your forgetfulness ‘gainst his sin’s ranks.The ills you inflict out of spite and disdainAre sweet to your lover, he does not complain.Your petulance prized is beyond fairy gifts;Your vengeance most dear is; his hope it uplifts.   20No soul can imagine what pleasure is felt,Or grace seen, in all the fell blows you have dealt.Your wrath is thus sweet; how much more so your grace!If mourning so grieve, what from feast would take place?He weeps; but he hopes you’ll believe not his tears;And, out of affection, not lessen his fears.He loves your great kindness, your anger as well.He equally dotes on those opposites fell.The thorn escape should he, and visit the rose,He’d warble as nightingale, moved by love’s throes.   25Most wondrous this bird’s strangest use of his bill;With thorns, as with roseleaves, he would his mouth fill.Not nightingale this; fiery dragon it is;All wrongs seem to him, through his love, purest bliss.He loveth a rose, and himself is a rose.He loveth himself; and seeks love for its woes.” 
Just so is the soul. Its tale, just parrot’s tale.O where is the One to whom all souls make wail?Where is the man, feeble, who’s yet innocent?30   His heart, Solomon and his whole armament.When he, with tears bitter, is heard to complain,The seven vaults of heaven re-echo the strain.In anguish he groans; God, in mercy, him hears.His cry is: “O Lord!” And God wipes off his tears.Abasement in him, is by God highly prized.His blasphemies, o’er other men’s faith are raised. Each instant, in soul, he ascends to heaven’s gate;His mitre’s with crowns capped, of infinite state. His frame’s here on earth; his pure soul with the Lord35   In heaven’s highest sphere, above man’s thought or word.A heaven such as this thou contemplatest not;Thou every moment imaginest — what?With him “where” and “nowhere” are quite equal felt.To angels the “four rivers” seem a mere belt. 
Break off we this theme. Let’s discuss other things.Cease trifling. “’Tis God who knows best” sense’s rings. Let’s seek to inquire how it fares with our friends, — The merchant, his parrot. Who is’t understands? 
The former had promised, at latter’s request,40   To give to the birds of far Hind his bequest.So when he had reached that land, greatly renownedIn wooded retreat, flock of parrots he found.He stopped his beast, cried out, at top of his voice,That message his Polly had made, as his choice. 
One bird of the flock, he saw, then took to quake,Fell prone to the earth; no more breath seemed to take.The merchant regret felt for what he had done,Exclaiming: “Alas! The poor bird I’ve slain, lone!That creature was surely related to Poll;Two bodies; one soul; just as is magic doll.   45Why did I deliver that fatal message?I’ve killed a collateral of Poll’s lineage!” 
The tongue, by itself, acts just like flint and steel.A word from it, fire-like, we scathing can feel.Strike not, then, so rashly, fire’s sparks from thy tongue,In message or talk, feeble hearers among.The night is pitch dark; strewn around, cotton beds.Amongst beds of cotton, ’tis, sparks one most dreads.He sins who, unmindful of dire consequence,Lets fall spoken spark, — fires a whole world, immense.   50One rash word may set an assembly ablaze.Molehills into mountains, and higher, it can raise. 
In basis, our souls would appear Jesus-like.To kill, to resuscitate, words are godlike.If lifted could be from our souls the dark veil,Each word of each soul would with miracles trail. 
Dost wish to speak always to men with sweet words?Have patience. Impatience must not fret the cords.’Tis patience beloved is by all men of sense.Impatience a fault is, of children, intense.   55Who patience exhibits shall mount to heaven’s dome.Impatience who showeth, tastes wrath that’s to come. 
A saint is not hurt, whate’er else may betide, To swallow fell poison should he once decide. 
He’s whole, and he’s sound; strict diet’s his rule.Poor students are healthy in fever’s dread school.The Prophet has cautioned: “Brave though you may be,Commit not mad rashness, howe’er the foe flee.” 
Within thee’s a Nimrod. Approach not the fire.60   Approach it thou must? To be Abr’am aspire.A swimmer thou art not; — nor seaman by trade;From headstrongness strive not the deep sea to wade.From fire Abr’am brought forth a fresh-plucked red rose.A diver, from sea-bottom, pearls’ store can choose.A saint handles earth, turns it straightway to gold.A sinner, by touch, to earth turns this; — behold.A just man’s accepted of God, the Most High.His deeds are the works of God’s hand, still. Eigh! Eigh!Th’ imperfect one’s hand is aye Satan’s foul limb;65   Responsible rests he, howe’er he may climb. To him wisdom’s self’s but a mere misguidance.Th’ imperfect man’s science is crass ignorance.Whatever as cause acts, as cause counted is;A perfect man’s blasphemy’s pure faith, my quiz. Rash combatant, fight’st thou on foot ‘gainst horseman!Thy point thou’lt not carry; — as sure as thou’rt man. 
So, Egypt’s magicians, in old Pharaoh’s days,Contended ‘gainst Moses; and rashly, always.At length they owned Moses superior was;70   Men honour, revere him, who most of power has.They said to him, then: “Command ‘s thine! See! Purely!‘Thy rod cast down’ first. This thy wish is; surely.”He answered: “Nay, nay! First cast ye down your wands.Produce to our sight the tricks ye’ve in your hands.”The honour thus paid was a slur on their faith,Removing contention from out of their path. 
When they had perceived what was thus due to him,They error acknowledged, though somewhat too dim. 
The “perfect man “‘s free both to eat and to speak. If thou art “ imperfect,” eat, speak not, in freak.   75Thou art but an ear. He’s a tongue; — not like thee.To ear was addressed God’s word: “Silent be.” 
A newly-born infant, still sucking the breast,Is speechless some while. He’s all ear, at the best.His lips to keep closed he has, for a set time;To speak till he learns, — words to frame and to chime.If ear he lend not, he’ll not learn common sense;Becomes laughingstock; — folly shows, most immense.If hearing he have not, deaf being at root,He mute must remain; no tongue has he, to boot.   80Since, then, we must listen, before we can speak,Lend ear to thy teachers, to guide thee who seek.A room should be entered, as rule, through its door.Effects ever seek where thou seest their cause’ spoor.The speech that has need to be heard by no ear,The voice is of God; it’s to us ever near.Inventor is He. From no one has He learnt.Of all, He’s the stay; not a prop does He want.All others require, as in speech, so in deed,From others, instruction; they all patterns need.   85 
If thou art not negligent, — hear’st what’s been said,Adopt dervish frock; go and weep in homestead.Himself Adam saved from all blame by his tears.So tears run wherever repentance appears.To weep, Adam came down to this nether world;To sigh, moan, and groan; far from sweet Eden hurled, 
From paradise shut out, from heaven driven down,Like schoolboy in fool’s-cap, his great sin to drown. 
If thou’rt seed of Adam; — if from his loins sprung;90   Like him, do thou seek for God’s pardon, whilst young.With burnings of heart, and with moisture of eyes,As sun and as rain, do thou sorrow’s fruit raise.Of all the rich solace, what knowest thou of tears?Thou beggest still for bread, like a blind man, with leers.Thy stomach make void of foul greed’s lust for bread.Thy heart thou’lt find filled with deep love for Godhead.Thy infant soul wean from the gross milk of greed,Then teach it to join, next, in angel’s pure creed.So long thou remainest in darkness and thrall,95   A bantling of Satan thou art, out at call. 
The morsel that brings a pure light to the soulIs earned by endeavour; not begged with a bowl.Should oil, upon trimming, extinguish a lamp,Not oil may we name it; ’tis water; ’tis damp.The honestly-earned morsel, wisdom imparts;Gives softness to souls, and a warmness to hearts.If thou be aware that from thy morsel springHeartburnings and hate, know it’s not a blest thing.Hast wheat ever sown, and reaped barley instead?100   Hast known colt of ass from a mare in birth bred?A morsel, when eaten, ‘s a seed; its fruit, thought.A morsel, when swallowed, ‘s a sea pearls has brought.From good, honest morsels come, taken in mouth,Good works, and firm strivings to shun the soul’s drought.Reflections, though true, we’ll now bring to an end.To merchant and parrot’s tale ear we will lend. 
Our merchant his trading had quickly despatched,Then homeward he turned; with joy housedoor unlatched. 
To ev’ry male slave a rare present he brought;For each of his handmaids some gift he had bought.   105The parrot him questioned: “What news bringest thou me?And whom hast thou seen? What’s been said? Tell. Let’s see.”The merchant him answered: “I’m sorry for that.I’d rather my hand eat, than tell it thee; — flat.In thoughtlessness, folly, ah! why did I prateAbout thy fool’s message, until ’twas too late?” 
The parrot then asked: “What’s this fuss all about?What’s caused tribulation? Let’s hear it right out.”The merchant now said: “I told all thy sad griefTo flock of green parrots; — so like thee, their chief.   110Of them, one, affected with thy tale of woe,Heart-broken, a gasp gave, expired, and fell low.I conscience-struck was for the words I had said.But what is the use? A word breathed can’t be stayed.” 
A spoken word’s arrow swift shot from a bow,It can’t be recalled, whate’er we may do.An arrow once shot off will never come back.At source, inundation alone can have check.An outlet once found, there’s no stoppage for it.A world is then ruined, through lack of quick wit.   115Act, consequence little dreamt of may produce.The progeny’s far ‘yond our power to reduce. 
The work of one Maker ‘s this universe all.Our acts’ consequences to our accounts fall.Jack shoots off an arrow; — directs it to Jill.The arrow poor Jill hits; — straightway does her kill.If only it wound her, for great length of timeIt tortures. Pain’s God’s work; wherever the clime. 
Should Jack, at that moment, expire from his fright,120   To plague her Jill’s wound would not cease, day or night.If from the effect of great pain, then, she die,Remote cause is Jack, still, of her misery.Account he must render for those pangs of hers.Although they’re God’s acts, man to man them refers.And so propagation, seed-sowing, and all;Effects of them operate. God’s sole, the call. 
A saint acquires powers, most astounding, from God. The flying bolt he can avert with a nod.The door can be shut between cause, consequence,125   On saint’s reclamation, by God’s prescience.He makes said unsaid, from beginning to end.Hence, neither does skewer burn, roast to coal trend. From every mind that has knowledge of fact,Remembrance effaced is, though brains may be racked.Of this, dost thou proof require, most worthy friend,The text read: “What verse We annul, or We mend.” Again: “They my warning made you to forget.” By these is oblivion’s great power ‘fore us set. 
To make us remember, forget, they power have.130   They’ve hearts subjugated o’er creation’s wave.Whene’er dull forgetfulness blinds eye of man,No act can he do, howe’er wide his scan.Dost dare, thou, great saints to make laughingstock? To words of the Prophet give heed, silly block.Earth’s lords have dominion o’er bodies of clay.Enlightened saints rule hold o’er hearts; — their own sway.All acts are fruits, doubtless, of experience.Man, then, is but pupil. All’s, else, mere pretence. 
I’ll close now this subject; much more I might say;Prevented I am by the rules I obey.   135 
Remembrance, forgetfulness, both are of God.Support and aid, too, must depend on His nod.Of thoughts, God, men’s good and bad souls voids, each night,By millions. Since this has seemed good in His sight.By day, their hearts fill with their thoughts all, again,Those oystershells He fills with rich pearls amain.He knows all the thoughts that here trouble our frames.’Tis He that gives guidance to souls in their games. 
Thy talent, thy judgment, unto thee are given,That means thou may’st have to redeem thy fallen leaven.   140The goldRumi’s rich art’s not by weaver possessed,By jocund vein here, there another’s distressed.Though mind’s frame and talents endowments are, all,They seem to a foe mere machines for his thrall.When sleep is departed, thoughts, talents return,One’s foe so comes back, has of war one more turn.With dawn, all our thoughts, all our talents, awake,As erst, good or bad; ere repose we could take.So carrier pigeons, wherever they’ve been,Return to their homes, quit the woodlands all green.   145We see, thus, that all things revert to their source.Parts ever must go shares in whole’s intercourse. 
So soon as our bird heard that parrot’s sad state,A shudder he gave, fainted, grew stiff as slate.The merchant, on seeing this, seized with dismay,Himself dashed to earth; wished he’d been far away.His clothes rent in sorrow; his beard he plucked out;And moaned, in distress wildly sobbing, throughout: 
“My parrot, why, dearest, thus broken of heart?Dead art thou, now, really? So fain to depart?   150 
Poor pet! Darling bird! With thee, hours I could talk.My sweetheart! My second self! Loved was thy walk.Alas for poor Polly! Where’s now his sly chat?Alas, my companion! How shall I bear that?Had Solomon seen a green parrot like mine,What pleasure had he felt in other birds’ line?Dear prattler, in whose words I took such delight!And then, thus to leave me, with naught in my sight!Thy tongue to me dearer than gold’s wealth untold;155   At sound of thy sweet voice my joy was tenfold.” 
O tongue! Thou’rt a fire, and also a cornstack! My patience, the cornstack! Hark! How its flames crack!My soul doth, in secret, of thee complain sore;But whate’er thou wishest, it does evermore.O tongue: Thou’rt a treasure, beyond all earth’s price!And yet thou’rt a plague, that’s not always too nice!A whistle art thou, birds decoying afield.A solace to love’s wayward, fitful, spoilt child.To men thou’rt all darkness, and blasphemy’s bale;160   To saints, guide, companion too, through this dark vale.Thou’rt pitiless! Pity on me take, awhile.Thy bow thou hast strung, on poor me to work guile.Thou hast taken my bird; thou hast flustered my soul.So cruel why be? Why delight take so foul?An answer pray give; or else, deal out justice;Or hope let me have to taste joy’s chalice.My dawn! Thou dispellest my deep’ning darkness.My light! Day with thee is all sunshine brightness.Alas! That swift bird, boldly soaring, of mine,165   My lowest fall plumbed, traced my lineage divine.The ignorant, wooers of trouble are, all.“I swear,” down to “misery” read, thou poor thrall. 
From misery free made me thy countenance.From spume, so the clear stream of thy assistance.Regret is a nursing of phantoms by day.Neglect, stern realities drives not away.A zeal for the truth is in God, there’s no doubt.The heart, with God’s will, is constrained to burst out.He’s zeal, Who is “other,” far, than all things else, Beyond all praise, laud, blessing, thanks, in heart’s pulse.   170Alas! my hot tears have become briny lake,An offering worthy my lost idol’s sake.My parrot! My wise bird! My starling art thou!Interpreter, reader of thoughts, secrets, thou.All daily events, results, just or unjust,By Him ordained were, as I know, from the first.The Parrot, inspired, who by voice of man spoke,Existed ere dawn of existence first broke.That Parrot is plainly within thyself felt;Around thee His motto is ev’rywhere spelt.   175Art joyful? From Him, know, all joys here do spring.Art wronged? Thou submittest. Thou’rt under His wing.O thou, who for body dost injure thy soul,Thy proud flesh to pamper, dost wrong to thy whole.I, too, am in flames. Who, then, seeks burning brand,The trash to consume of conceit from the land?That which is once burnt cannot blaze out again.Select flaming brand, living fire choose, amain.Alas! Lackaday! What has thus come to me?My full moon in clouds why thus hidden to be?   180I scarcely can breathe; with deep sorrow heart burns;Male-lion-like, grief all kind condolence spurns.He who in his senses has thus become drunk,How fierce would he rage, if in cups he were sunk. 
A lion in heat, he, despising all bounds;No forest would hold him, nor dense jungle-grounds. 
Of rhymes do I dream? ’Tis my love orders me Of love still to dream; — swain devoted to be:“Thyself make thou happy. Rhymes leave, now, alone.185   The rhyme I seek, thou art. I love thee, my own.What’s rhyme, that thou turnest thy thoughts thitherward?Mere bramble on wall, hedging round our vineyard.I care not for words, for asseverations;My time if I pass in these sweet delusions.Suggestion there is, one, kept secret from men.To thee I’ll impart. Thou keep’st secrets, like pen.Suggestion occult, Abeam knew not one jot.One secret, that Gabriel as yet conceives not.One mystery, to Jesus that never was known,190   In jealousy God spake to me all alone.” 
What do we with tongue? We affirm; we deny.I’m no affirmation; denial am I.In impersonality, person I find.In ungenerosity, goodness of mind.Earth’s potentates slaves are of their own slaves’ will.All mortals, mere corpses of dead corpses, still.Kings, subject are here to their own subjects’ whim.Man’s drunk with those intoxicated of him.The hunter of birds them entraps in his toils,195   Himself is then pounced on, despite of his foils.A beauty makes prey of the men soft of heart.Sweethearts fall the victims of false lover’s dart.If lover thou see, know, a sweetheart he’s, too,’Tis but a relation. Each one’s one of two.If thirst seeks for water in this wide domain,The water, on its side, the thirst courts again. 
Should any one love thee, do thou silent be.Thy ear claims he then, thou attentive should’st be.The torrent bank up that threats dire overflow;Or ravage ‘twill make of the lands down below.   200What care I if cities in ruins should fall,In ruins we treasures find dear to us all.Man merged in God, most entirely is drownedAs wave of a sea, soul but goes a set round.Is bottom of that sea preferred more, or top?Is God’s shaft desired more, or shield, it to stop?By doubts and by fears thou’lt piecemeal be torn, heart.If thou well distinguish from joy, sorrow’s smart.Desir’st thou to taste, then, true happiness, joy?’Tis not thine to choose. Beauty ever’s most coy.   205Each spangle of beauty’s star outshines the moon.To wreck a whole world’s naught to beauty’s full moon.What is it we’re good for? To sacrifice self.Then hasten, my good friend, to offer thyself.A lover’s whole life is but self-sacrifice;He wins not a heart, save his own heart’s the price.A heart I once courted with soft blandishment;With pretexts was put off, most magniloquent.I said my heart brimful was quite with her love;Said she: “Hold thy tongue, now; that theme let’s not move.”   210What have you been doing, you two eyes of mine?Why saw you that cruel one? Left me to pine?Presumptuous man! Didst thou hold her so cheap,Because, by her kindness, made easy thy sleep?What’s easily got in this world, ‘s easy spent.A child will give jewels at cake’s allurement.With love I’m o’erwhelm’d, now, of such a sad sort,That ancients and moderns to it are all sport. 
I’ve made short my story; details are not given.’Twould otherwise scorch heart and tongue’s whole joint leaven.   215 
When I may say “lip,” I mean “margin of sea;”When “No!” you may take its true sense “Yes!” to be.My sourness of looks by much sweetness is caused.By words’ multitude, silence strict I’ve imposed.My sweetness I’ll hide, in this world, in the next.As veil, austere features I’ve firmly annexed.My secrets to shield from the ken of all ears,One out of a hundred, alone, here appears. 
The world is right jealous, for reason that best:220   God first jealous was, long before all the rest. He’s soul. The two worlds His august body form. The body, through soul must receive good or harm.Whoso in his worship turns truly to God,Foul shame ’twould be for him to bow to faith’s rod.Whoever’s a keeper of wardrobe to king,Brings loss to his sovereign by petty trading.With potentate, whoso, by grade, council holds,If placed as a guard at a gate, roundly scolds.Admitted to honour by kissing of hands,225   To stoop, kiss the foot, degradation now stands.To kiss foot of sovereign’s a great honour, sure.Compared with hands-kissing, ignominy pure.A king would be jealous of servant so baseHis foot who should kiss, when his hand was the place.God’s jealousy wheat is on full threshing-floor;Man’s jealousy, chaff blown away out of door.Know: Jealousy rise doth take, still, in our God;Man’s jealousy budded from that noble rod. 
Let’s quit that deep subject; take up plaint and wail,Against the great hardship of love’s chastening flail.   230I cry, for that He loves to hear all my cries.My moans, lamentations, are what He enjoys.How should I cease wailing at His fell caprice?I’m not of His darlings, nor in His service.How should I not be, in my soul, black as night?Deprived of His look, sweetness, warmth, and mild light.All his disagreements are pleasant to me.My life I’d give up, sacrifice I would be.I love all my anguish; I dote on my pain,So long as it pleases my heart’s treasured swain.   235My sorrow’s my eyes’ choicest collyrium;My tears are as pearls from deep-sea tedium.Tears poured forth by lovers at His adored feet,Are pearls; though we’re used them as tears to misgreet.My soul’s Soul’s the tyrant of whom I complain.Complaint I make not. I describe but my pain.My heart but pretends it has been too much hurt;Excuse is this merely. I smile at such blurt. 
Do justice now, God, of all justice the fount!Thou sittest in justice’ seat; threshold I count.   240From chief seat to threshold! How far raised above!Where stand “we” and “I” in the sight of our love? O Thou who art free, quite from “I” and from “we,”Thou heart’s-joy of all men and women that be;Where men and where women join, One art Thou, Sole!Where units appear, Thou’rt the sum of the whole!This “I” and this “we” Thou’st ordained for Thy state;That psalms, hymns, and lauds may still rise to Thy gate. 
When “I” and when “we” shall unite both in One,245   Absorbed they’ll be in Thy essence alone.Existencies, potencies, all rise from Thee.Denial and potency, Thou’rt from these free.Can eye now behold Thee as truly Thou art?Can heart Thy love picture, and smiles, e’en in part? 
The heart that’s a slave to a love or a smileCan never be worthy to see Thee awhile.Engrossed he that’s now with pleasure and pain,Can he, by these accidents, live o’er again?Green pastures of love, in their infinitude,250   More fruits yield than care, and than beatitude.Love’s far above these evanescent two states;Without spring and autumn, its verdant estates. 
Pay beauty’s high toll, Beauty, on Thy sweet face;Set forth lover’s torments with all due preface.That archness of look of my coquettish SwainAnew has my heart fired with love’s brand of pain.I gave Him permission to pour out my blood.I spoke of permission. He fled me for good.Why fleest thus, always, the groans of complaint?255   Why pourest Thou suffering’s floods on the faint?O Thou, whom each morn, as it dawns in the East,Has found, like the sun, full prepared for a feast,What cause have I furnished for all this sad pain,O Thou, whose lips sweeter than sugar remain?Thou ever new life givest to this old world;The prayer hear of one whom from life Thou hast hurled!For heaven’s sake, quit talking of spring’s roses red,And think of the nightingale banished their bed.My eagerness grows not from joy, or from grief;260   My senses cajoled will not be by whim’s thief.My state is just one very often not seen;Contest not; truth’s ever victorious been. 
Think not my state that of all these common men;Be not benefactor, to tyrannise then.If kindness and tyranny, joy, grief, are new;All new things must die. God inherits. That’s true.’Tis dawn. O of dawn Thou who art the sole cause!Excuse for me make to Husāmu-’d-Dīn’s laws. Excuses for angels and souls Thou canst see;Thou art the soul’s life; coral’s shine is from Thee.   265From Thy light have sprung men and brightness of dawn. We’re all aided by Thee, Thou cup of wine drawn.Why does Thy gift keep me in constant suspense; — Thy spiritual wine, that still charms ev’ry sense.A beggar from me’s wine in fermentation!Spheres lessons take from me in revolutionWith me wine gets drunk; I get not drunk with it.From me body grows; I spring thence not one bit.We’re bees, all of us; and our bodies, the wax;With it we build cells to conceal our dark tracks.   270 
These considerations would grow longer still.We’ll turn to our merchant. We left him so ill.He thus, lamentations, sad groans, sadder moans,Shot forth, with sighs, burning; — grieved hearts’ crater-stones.Complaints, contradictions, petitions, like words,Now literal, then keen metaphors, sharp as swords.The drowning, ’tis known to each one who breath draws,To save threatened life, will, though vain, grasp at straws;In hopes that some aid to his rescue will come,He struggles, he flounders, he thinks of his home.   275His sweetheart takes pleasure his struggles to see;An effort’s more noble than despondency. 
A bridegroom is, surely, not quite free from cares.His moans we expect not. Pain’s not what he fears.The reason this, why the Lord’s blest scripture says:“Each day He’s engaged in some one of His ways.” Therefore thou, my dear son, thyself still exertUntil thy last breath. Seek not toil to avert.Then, at the last moment, the time may have come,280   When favour ‘ll be shown thee for all thou hast done.How much, and how long, strives the soul of each man,The king’s at the window; — hear, see all, he can. 
Our merchant the parrot cast out from his cage.The parrot flew up; on a tree took high stage.The bird that was thought dead, now swift flew away.His course like the sun’s from the morn to midday. 
The merchant sore marvelled at his flying bird;Could not understand it; thought: “What has occurred?”Then cried, looking upwards: “Come, pretty Poll mine!285   Relate all about this freak strangest of thine.What was that bird’s game, there, of whom then thou spokest?What trick was ‘t he played? Grief in me thou awokest.” 
The parrot him answered: “He taught me the trick.He came and said: ‘Free thyself now. Up! Be quick!’No sooner had sounded thy voice in his ears,He, as was agreed on, fell dead, it appears.As much as to say, here, to me in my cage:Thou death counterfeit; so thou savest thy old age.’” 
Become thou but grain; thou’lt be pecked up by birds.290   A flower make thyself; all the children go thirds.Thy grain hidest thou? Thou’rt naught else but brick-trap.Thy flower shuttest up? Thou’rt a weed on house-top. 
His beauty whoever may offer for sale,Invites many troubles his heart to assail.Hopes, fears, wraths, and jealousies strike him at once;As rain on his head pours in winter; — the nonce.All sorts of opponents, by jealousy moved;With them, even friends joy to see him so proved.Whoever may put off to sow seed in spring,Ignores the true value of time’s swiftest wing.   295Let each one take refuge in mercy of God,Who grace manifold on our souls has bestowed.Then shalt thou find shelter, when shelter thou needest.Fire’s, water’s protection thou’lt have, as thou heedest.It was not the sea alone Noah, Moses, saved.Nor sea alone was it, their foes that ingraved.It was not the fire that stood Abeam in stead,Till God conquered Nimrod by gnat in his head.It was not the mountain that called John to it,   300And drove back pursuers with huge rocks that hit.It cried: “Hither, John; refuge come take with me.Thy. life I will save from foe’s sharp sword. Come; see.” 
“Adieu, master dear; I’m now off to my home.May’st thou, too, be free, when the judgment shall come.Good-bye, my kind master; compassion thou’st shown.From tyranny’s chains, now, through thee, have I flown.”He gave to our merchant some words of advice.Then flew away, shouting: “Good-bye! Very nice!”The merchant a “ Safe journey “ augured to him.Then thought: “Useful lesson I’ve learned, and trim.   305His doings may serve as a pattern for me.I’ll imitate him. Better teacher can’t be.My soul is not, sure, inferior to his.See how souls should act, to gain heavenly bliss.” 
The body’s a cage and a thorn to the soul.Hence, seldom are. body and soul wholly whole. 
The body says: “I’ll follow where thou mayest lead.”The soul answers: “Nay! Thy desire’s all I heed.”The body then argues: “There’s none like to thee,310   Thou’rt perfect, kind, beautiful, good as needs be.”The soul now demurs: “This and next worlds are thine.All hearts to the feast hasten, where thou’rt to shine.”The body then says: “’Tis a time for delight.”And soul responds quick: “Season, sure, to bedight.” 
When body sees crowds, throngs, profess love for it,Control of self loses, in teeth takes the bit,It does not reflect how the thousands and more,Itself like, has sin brought to ruin’s grim shore.The bait of gross flattery is always found sweet.315   Therewith be not caught. Lurid fire’s ‘neath its greet.Its sweetness is present; its flame’s not forecast;Its smoke of destruction will burst forth at last.Say not: “I’ll ne’er listen to flatterer’s tale;They’re sordid, its motives; — like ‘sprat to catch whale.’”A lampoon should thy panegyrist inditeAgainst thee in public, thy rest’s disturbed quite.Thou knowest it was spoken in sheer angry spleen,When he in some wish unsuccessful had been.The barb of it rankles, still, in thy heart’s core,320   The price paid for flattery, ’tis, makes thee feel sore.Long, long shalt thou feel the deep wound it inflicts.It stimulates pride; all the soul it infects.Man shows not how sweet flattery is to his soul.The instant he’s lampooned, he’s lost self-control. 
Thus, pill or draught taken to combat disease,A long time, indeed, you’re thence robbed of all ease.And if you eat sweetmeats, their tastes are soon lost.Nor one, nor the other, is worth half the cost.Duration they have not; effects they produce.325   By contraries, contraries all we deduce. 
As hidden effect of a diet of sweets,By long incubation, boils break out, or gleets. 
The flesh, with praise pampered, a Pharaoh becomes.The flesh, mortified, due submission assumes.A servant to all be; princely power be forgot.Submit to cuffs, ball-like; like bat, batter not.So soon, otherwise, as thee fortune forsakes,Thy flatterers will turn. ’Tis greed only, them makes.The throngs of gross flatterers, who sang loud thy praise.‘Will shake their heads, shout out: “Poor de’il! What a craze!”   330On seeing thee, then, as thou wanderest about,They cry: “Cursed hobgoblin! From grave he’s come out!” 
Like beardless, vain boy they’ve addressed as “My Lord,”To work on his vanity, fair fame defraud,In vice when he’s nurtured, his beard thickly grown,E’en Satan would blush a pact with hint to own.’Tis men Satan seeks out, to work them mischief.Thee he’ll never seek; worse than him, thou, a thief.So long as thou’rt man, Satan follows thy track.He tempts thee to drain manhood’s lees, still, and wrack.   335When thou’rt become devil, just like to himself,He flees thee in fright; leaves thee quite to thyself.All they who before refuge took in thy power,With horror fly from thee, in this thy fallen hour.Our words are mere lies, all tergiversations. Without the divine grace, they’re sheer delusions.Without grace of God, holy aid from His saints,Best “record” of man must be blots and complaints. O God! Thy grace, sole, ’tis sustains us as men,Another to name with Thee suits not a pen.   340 
To servants, sound judgment Thou’st kindly vouchsafed.This gift made the means, we’ve from error escaped. 
One drop from the sea of Thy knowledge, does usWith omniscience, surely, make confluous.That drop have I gathered up in my soul’s trust.Do Thou save it, Lord, from lust’s soil and sin’s gust.Sin’s soil, oh! permit not that drop to absorb!Those gusts forbid Thou more to lessen its orb!True, Thou art All-Powerful, and Thy gracious will345   Could force them to yield it back, grace to fulfil.A drop, lost in air, dispersed in the soil,Is still, through Thy providence, safe from despoil.Become it, or others, a nonentity,Thy beck can them summon to new entity.How many diverse still combine to form one.Thou givest the word, they part, each to its zone.Each moment, from naught fresh creations still come,In flocks. and in crowds. ’Tis Thou makest them a home. 
Each night, in profound sleep our consciousness sinks;350   Becomes non-existent; — waves on seashore’s brinks.When morning afresh dawns, they wake up anew,Like fish in the sea, plashing drops, falling dew. 
In autumn, the leaves see. They quit, then, the trees;Like scattered battalions, they fly with the breeze.The rook, in robes sable, as mourner acts, chief;In wood and field croaks for his much-deplored leaf.Command from Thee goes forth; — Thou, true Forest-King;Nonentity gives back each late stolen thing.O Death? Thou restorest, now, the whole prey of thine;355   The leaves, flowers, and fruits, in their due season shine. 
Consider, my friend, in thyself; now, awhile,The spring and the autumn thou in thee seest smile. 
Look thou that thy heart be green, yield its good fruitsOf righteousness, purity, — heaven’s best recruits.Through garlands of verdure thy rough branches hid;With bloom in profusion, hills, plains, all tumid. 
These words of mine come from the Spirit supreme,To call to mind heaven’s everlasting grand scheme.Thou smellest a perfume of flowers. Flowers are not yet;Thou dreamest fermentation, though wine is not set.   360That odour will draw thee to where the flowers grow, The joys of sweet paradise, “where rivers flow.” Of hope it perfume is that leads our souls on;As hope led forth Jacob in quest of his son. Bad tidings and fearful cost Jacob his sight.Reunion, in hope, to him brought back the light.If thou’rt not a Joseph, a Jacob be yet.As he did, weep, mourn; joy, like him, thou shalt get.If thou art not Shīrīn, thou may’st Ferhād be; And if not Laylà dear, Majnūn’s ravings see.   365Accept the advice of old Gazna’s sage, wise. To thee, ever, new life from old life may rise:“To give one’s self airs, requires, first, a fair face;If beauty thou hast not, run not thou that race.”An ugly face ugly is, all the world round.A blind eye’s affliction, where’er it be found.In presence of Joseph, no coquetries use. But humble thyself; soft entreaties infuse. 
The parrot had death simulated, as prayer.370   Do thou to pride die; thou mayest so live for e’er.From Jesus a breath may, then, blow upon thee;Transform thee to what he was, what thou mayest be.A stone will not blossom because it is spring.As earth make thyself; flowers around thee may cling.For years thou a stone ‘st been; lay this well to heart.373   Try patience a short time; ‘twill give a fresh start. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





VIII. The Harper 
HAST heard, perchance, there was in days of good ‘UmerA minstrel talented, whose harpings moved the sphere?The nightingales all wept in transports at his voice,One pleasure made men’s hearts a hundredfold rejoice.His song enchanted every gathering where he went,Applause as thunder broke forth, to his heart’s content.Like voice of Isrāfīl, whose trump on judgment day, Will wake the dead to life, his made the saddest gay.Dear friend to Isrāfīl he was, and mendicant;His notes made plumes to sprout on hide of elephant.   5 
Some day will Isrāfīl attention pay to moans.Their souls he will recall to old and putrid bones.The prophets, likewise, all, musicians are on hearts.Disciples hence expire with joy by fits and starts.Our outward ears the strains hear not which thence proceed;Those ears, in many ways, degraded are indeed. 
Mankind the songs of fairies never hear at all,They are not versed in fairies’ ways, their voices small. 
’Tis true, the chants of fairies’ sounds are of this world; 10   But songs sung by men’s hearts are far above them hurled.Both men and fairies pris’ners are in earthly cage.Both, too, are thralls of sinful ignorance’s rage.Read thou the text: “O fairy troop,” in book of God. Consider, too: “Can ye pass out?” Who holds the rod? 
The inward hymn that’s sung by all the hearts of saintsCommences: “O component parts of that thing not.” Now since they take their rise in this not, negative,They put aside the hollow phantom where we live. 
Ye putrid corpses, wrapt in rank corruption’s cloth,15   Our everlasting souls are free from birth and growth.Were I but to recite one stave from their blest song,All living souls would rise out from their tombs among.Lend ear attentively; that may not distant be;As yet, however, leave’s not given to tell it thee. 
The saints are Isrāfīls of this our passing time.The spiritually dead through them live life sublime.Our souls mere corpses are; their graves, our bodies’ crowds.At voice of saint do they arise, clothed in their shrouds.They say: “This voice has in it something to be feared.20   To raise the dead, God’s voice alone has power, we’ve heard.We were all dead, and unto earth had we returned.The voice of God we’ve heard; our prisons we have spurned.” 
The voice of God without, also within the vail,Can give the gift to all, it gave to Mary: “Hail!”O ye whose death was not that which attacks the flesh,At sound of the Beloved’s voice ye’ve risen afresh. 
That voice the Bridegroom’s voice most truly was, ’tis said,Although ’twas from the lips of His servant, Ahmed.God said to him: “Thy tongue, thy eye, thy ear, I am;All thy contentment, anger, thoughts, ’tis I undam.   25Go on; ‘By Me he hears, by Me he sees;’ that’s thee;Thou art the head; thou holdest the place of Head’s trustee.In ecstasy, since thou art ‘He the Lord’s who is,’ I will be thine; for see, ’tis said: ‘The Lord is his.’Now will I say to thee: ‘Thou art;’ and now; ‘I am.’What I may say’s as clear as is the sun in heaven.Wherever I may shine an instant in a lamp,A world of doubts I solve; on all My seal I stamp.The darkness which the sun could never yet illume,By magic of My breath grows bright as peacock’s plume.   30Wherever gloom may reign as undisturbed night,When shone upon by Me, like noonday’s forthwith bright.” 
’Twas He who taught to Adam ev’ry thing’s true name,Through Adam to mankind imparted He the same.Take thou enlightenment from Adam or the Lord.Draw wine as thou mayest list from jar or from the gourd. The distance is not great between the gourd and jar.The gourd is not, like thee, made drunk by grape’s nectar.Draw water from the brook, or from a pitcher’s mouth;The brook is still the source whence pitcher’s filled; forsooth.   35 
Seek light as listest; whether from the moon or sun.The moon derives her sheen from daystar’s golden tun.Imbibe what light thou canst from any twinkling star.The Prophet said: “Stars are all my disciples.” Hear! 
He further said: “How happy they who see my face, And happy they who look on them in their own place.”He said: “Good luck to all who have the happy chance To look on my disciples, — mirrors of my glance.”If thou by taper’s aid proceed to light a lamp,40   The eye that sees its light, perceives the taper’s stamp.If one lamp from another should be lighted; well!The light received from this, has come from that one’s cell.And so, if through a thousand wicks the light should pass,Who sees the last enjoys the gift of all the mass.The light of this last lamp’s as pure as is the whole;No difference is there. And thus ’tis with the soul.The light diffused by teachers in these latter days,No other is than what was shown by earlier rays. 
Our Prophet said: “The breathings of the Lord your God, 45   In these your days of pilgrimage, on all sides prod.Your ears and minds lend ye to all signs of the times;Perchance ye may inhale those breathings in these climes.” 
One breathing came and found you. Straightway it was gone.To all who sought, new life it gave. It then had done.Another breathing’s come. Be ye not unprepared.Ye may not let it go by. Something must be shared.It found your souls on fire. ’Tis thence they cease to burn.Your souls it found all corpses. Life it made return.Your fiery souls by it all quickly were puffed out.50   Dead souls of yours by it began aloud to shout.Their present calm, and this vivacity’s from heaven;Resembling not the turbulence by which man’s driven. 
One breathing from the Lord, when blown on earth and air,Ill qualities converts straight into all that’s fair.For fear lest any breathing such as this thee shake,Read thou the text: “They shunned the task to undertake.” Had not “ they shrunk from it,” where now would’st thou have been?Had they not feared, would’st thou this grade have ever seen?But yesterday an opening gleamed for better things;Till greed for fleshly morsels stopped the way of kings.   55 
For sake of some such morsel Luqmān was made bail. The time’s now that for Luqmān morsel’d not avail.The troubles we endure are all for morsel’s sake.Be Luqmān. Thou’lt extract the thorn that makes thee ache.A thorn or chafing hurt not Luqmān’s horny hand.Through greed thou lackest the discipline made him so bland.The thing thou thoughtest a date-palm, know, is but a thorn.Ungrateful, uninformed thou art, now, as when born.The soul of Luqmān was a vineyard of the Lord.Why then into his soul did thorn pierce like a sword?   60 
Thorn-eating camel, truly, is this world of ours,Ahmed, then, came and mounted; — him that camel bears.O camel, on thy back thou bearest a vase of rose.On thee from thence have sprouted rosebuds, as God knows.Thy tastes thee lead to camel-thorn and wastes of sand.To thee the thorn’s a rose; the wilderness, rich land. 
O thou who in such quest hast wandered up and down,How long wilt thou contend rose-garden’s sandy down? 
Thou canst not now extract the thorn from thy sore foot.65   With that blind eye of thine, how wilt thou see its root?A man whose vast desires the world could not contain,Is sometimes by one thorn’s point sent to death’s domain. 
Now Ahmed came; a tender, kind companion, he.“Speak to me, O Humayrā,” said he, “speak to me.” Put thou thy shoe, Humayrā, quick into the fire. The rocks will rubies turn, from his feet’s blood in mire.This Humayrā’s a woman’s name, the poet’s love.Such is the Arab custom. Soul is meant. Now move.That Soul’s no need to fear from being named as girl. 70   Of sex, as male or female, that Soul has no twirl.That Soul is far above sex, accident, and mood.That Soul is not man’s darling, made of flesh and blood.That Soul is not the life that grows from cakes of bread;That’s sometimes of one mind, and other then instead.Of good is He the worker, good He is also.From goodness separate, no goodness e’er will flow. 
If thou’rt made sweet through sugar, it may happen still,That sugar none thou find, to sweeten thee at will.But if thou sweet become, like sugar, through good heart,75   This sweetness from thy sugar never will depart. 
How can a lover find love’s nectar in himself?That question passes comprehension, my good elf.Man’s finite reason disbelieves love’s potent sway.Himself he yet esteems endowed with head to-day. 
He’s clever, and he’s knowing, nil he’s not; anon.Until an angel’s nothing, he’s a sheer demon.In word and act a man may be a friend of ours;But when it comes to heart and mind, he huffs and lours.If he from esse, reach not posse’s state, he’s nil;And willingly; — unwillingly, we may worlds fill.   80The Soul, our God, ‘s perfection. Perfect is His “call.” His Ahmed used to say: “Ensoul us, O Bilāl! Lift up thy voice, O Bilāl, thy harmonious voice.Put forth the breath that I infused at thy heart’s choice.The breath that ’twas made Adam lose all consciousness;While all the hosts of heaven, too, felt their helplessness.” 
That Ahmed, Mustafà, at one blest sight stood lost. His wedding-night it was. Dawn-worship it him cost. He woke not from the sleep his blessed vision shed.Dawn-worship he o’erslept; the sun shone overhead.   85On that, his wedding-night, in presence of his bride,His sainted soul kissed hands, high honour’s fullest tide. 
Both love and soul are occult, hidden and concealed.If God I have “bride” named, let it stand fault repealed.I silence would have kept, from fear of love’s caprice,If for a moment only, I’d been granted grace.But He still said: “Say on. The word is not a fault.It’s naught but the decree there should appear default.It’s shame to him who only sees another’s faults.What fault is noticed by the Soul safe from assaults?”   90 
A fault it is to eyes of creatures ignorant.But not with God the Lord, our Maker benignant.E’en blasphemy is wisdom with th’ Omnipotent; Attributed to mortals, mortal sin patent.If one sole fault be found amidst a hundred truths,’Tis like a stick that’s used to prop sweet flowers’ growths.Both will be surely weighed in justice’ equal scales;For, like the soul and body, both are pleasant tales.The saints have therefore said, for sweet instruction’s sake:95   “The bodies of the pure with souls just balance make.” 
Their words, their selves, their figures, whate’er these may be,Are all Soul Absolute, without a trace to see.Sworn enemy is Body to their spiritual life,Just as one game of backgammon, with names full rife. The body goes to earth; is soon reduced to clay;The soul endures like salt, and suffers no decay.The salt, than which Muhammed far more sapid is;From “Attic salt” that’s found in each dictum of his.That Attic salt’s an heirloom, heritage from him;100   His heirs are here with thee. Seek unto them passim.They’re sitting in thy presence. What’s in front of thee?Thy soul demands thy care. Where can thy forethought be? 
If thou still be in doubt, and not sure of thyself,Thou’rt slave unto thy body; soul thou hast not, elf.Behind, before, above, below, stands body’s shade.The soul has no “dimensions;” clearly it’s displayed. 
Lift thy eyes, dear Sir, in glorious light of God;That thou be not accounted most shortsighted clod.Thou nothing knowest or carest about, save grief and joy;Thou nothing, by mere nothings hemmed in, man or boy.   105To-day’s a day of rain. Yet journey thou till night;Not on account of downpour, but because it’s light. 
One day did Mustafà, go to the burial-ground.The Prophet at a funeral, his friend’s, was found.At filling in the grave he lent a helping hand;A living seed he planted in that holy land.The trees thereof are emblems, — cypress, fir, or yew;Their boughs are hands in prayer uplifted, — if men knew.They many lessons inculcate to men of sense,He who hath ears to hear may thence draw inference.   110A contemplative mind from them new secrets culls.The heedless are amused with what men’s reason dulls.With tongue-shaped leaves and finger-twigs they us address;From inmost heart of earth they publish mysteries.As ducks dive into water, they plunge into earth.Like rooks they were, now peacocks, gay in their new birth.The winter shuts them up, as prisoners, in its ice.Black rooks then, bare; as peacocks spring bids them arise.God makes them look like dead in winter’s frozen reign,But with returning spring wakes them to life again.   115Dull atheists contend this is a story old,And ask why we to God attribute it, so bold.They say these alternations ever thus were seen.The world of old, they think, as ’tis, has ever been.In spite of their contention, in breasts of His saintsHas God at all times reared rich gardens free from feints. 
Each flower that yields to sense agreeable perfume,Speaks volumes to saint’s heart with its mysterious tongue. 
Each perfume from a flower rubs atheist’s nose in dirt;120   Although he rush about, and boundless nonsense spirt.An atheist’s like a chafer clinging to rosebud,Or like a nervous patient tortured by drum’s thud.He makes himself as fussy as each touting wight;But shuts his eyes to flashes of conviction’s light.He shuts his eyes perversely, with them will not see.The saint, on other hand, ‘s clear-sighted certainly. 
The Prophet, when returned home from the funeral,Found ‘Ā’isha was waiting, him to welcome all.So when her eyes fell on him, just as in he came,125   She him approached, and on him hand placed; gentle dame.She touched his turban, cloak and coat, his sleeves and shoes,His hair and beard, his face and hands, peering for news.He asked her what she sought with so much eager zeal.She answered him: “To-day of rain there’s fallen a deal.I’m lost in wonderment to feel thou art not wet;No dampness is there here. I marvel still more yet.”He asked: “What veil worest thou God’s service to fulfil?” She answered: “I a plaid of thine threw o’er my frill.”He said: “That plaid it was for which the Lord, to thee,130   My lady pure, a shower caused visible to be.That shower was not of raindrops .from the clouds that fall;A shower of mercy ’twas; its cloud and sky, His call.” 
[“In regions of the soul so many skies are there! They issue their commands to spheres of earth and air.The ups and downs in spirit’s path form quite a class;So many hills to climb; so many seas to pass.”] — Sanā’ī. 
The unseen world has other clouds, and other skies; Its sun is different; its water God supplies.Its rain proceeds from other clouds than does our own.God’s mercy ’tis that forms that rain when it pours down.   135Those rains are never seen, save by the eyes of saints.Mere men “by new creation puzzled,” judge them feints. 
One rain there is that nourishment brings in its track;Another rain also that works a whole world’s wreck.The rain of spring does wonders in the garden’s fold;The rain of autumn chills like ague’s shivers cold.The spring rain nourishes whate’er it falls upon.Autumnal showers but bleach and shrivel; all turns wan.Thus is it with the cold, the wind, and eke the sun;They’re means from which such different phases seem to run.   140In things invisible the same rule still holds good;Advantage, loss, annoyance, fraud, affliction’s flood.The words of saints are like the vernal breeze in power;They cause sweet flowers to open in man’s bosom bower.And like the rains of spring on herbage of the field,They raise in pious hearts a harvest of rich yield.If thou shouldst see a trunk that’s blighted, dead, and dry,Attribute not this state to quickening air’s supply.The air still quickens, though dead stumps feel not its power.’Tis only what’s alive, that freshens by a shower.   145 
The Prophet gave advice: “From breezes cool, in spring, Your bodies cover not; they’re invigorating. 
Allow them, then, full play; they’ll give your sinews strength.See how, with them, the trees are clothed with leaves, at length.Beware, however; autumn’s chills ye must not court.They’re fatal to men’s lives; the trees they strip, in short.” 
Traditionists report the Prophet’s blessed words;But there they have stopped short; they add naught afterwards.The whole class, ignorant of application’s call,150   The mountain have discerned; its mines they have missed, all. 
The autumn chill, with God, is fleshly lust and pride;The vernal breeze, the spirit, wisdom, sense to guide.Of wisdom, in thy head, a glimmering thou hast;Seek then for perfect wisdom; be to it steadfast.Thy partial stock from thence completed thou wilt bring.On neck of flesh completed wisdom put, as ring. 
Thou seest now, applied, the breeze of spring is he,Who, perfect in himself, men perfect helps to be.From words of his take care thou close not up thy ear.155   Thy faith they will confirm; religion fruit will bear.Reproachful, or in praise, hear all he has to say;From thee the fires of hell they’ll help to turn away.Reproaches, admonitions, life will bring at lastIf faith they but confirm, flesh in subjection cast.By admonition is the heart encouraged to good deeds;And by reproaches is the soul kept back from evil’s meeds.Upon the heart of teacher clings dark sorrow’s pall,If one twig from heart’s garden’s seen away to fall. 
Good ‘Ā’isha, the gem of honour’s casket wide,Then asked the Prophet (who’s of both the worlds the Pride):   160“O thou who of all creatures every essence art,What was the reason rain this day has played its part?Was it a rain of mercy, such as sometimes falls;Or was it as a menace justice fitly calls?Was it a vernal rain, dispensing benefits;Or was it an autumnal shower, to dig grave pits?” 
He answered: “’Twas a sprinkle, sent to soothe our care, — That fruit inherited by all who Adam share.Should man remain exposed for long to care’s fierce flame,’Twould work him wrack and ruin, crush his mortal frame.”   165 
The world would go to ruin in a little while;Man’s greed would get the upper hand, did he not smile.The prop of this wide world is heedlessness, my son;And thoughtfulness on earth below’s a curse, when won.For thoughtfulness belongs unto the upper world;Triumphant here below, all’s soon to ruin hurled.This thoughtfulness a sun is; greed’s a mass of ice.This thoughtfulness is water; greed, the filth of vice.So from the upper world scant tricklings are sent down,That greed and envy may not ruin every town.   170If those scant tricklings were to prove a copious rill,Defects and talents both would cease our soil to till.Let’s leave these moralisings; they would have no end.So go we back to seek the minstrel, our old friend. 
That minstrel’s talent had been rare; the world he’d charmed.At sound of his sweet voice, imagination ‘d swarmed.Each heart, birdlike, began to flutter in its cage;Surprise enchained men’s minds when his notes threw the gage. 
But now he was grown old; long years he’d passed on earth.175   Like falcon chasing gnats, he’d little cause for mirth.His back was double bent, like belly of wine-jar;His brows above his eyes with crupper-straps on par.His voice, the former joy of all who might it hear,Was now cracked, out of tune, uncouth, none could it bear.His tones, that might have made dame Venus mad with rage, Were now like donkey’s brayings in his sinking age. 
What is there beautiful that goes not to decay?Where is the roof that will not ruin be one day?Unless it be the words of saint from God; they’ll last180   ‘Till echoes of his voice shall sound in judgment blast.He is the inner joy that glads our inner man;The source from whom our beings rose when time began.He is the amber draws the motes of thought and speech;He gave the means to measure revelation’s reach. 
Our minstrel in old age felt poverty’s sure pinch.No money could he earn; bread, not enough for finch.He prayed: “O God, long life and full to me Thou’st given,To worthless sinner Thou hast shown foretaste of heaven.I’ve slighted Thy commandments seventy years and more,185   Not one day hast Thou let me pangs of want feel sore.No longer can I earn; I’m now Thy household guest;I’ll harp for love of Thee, Thou giver of my feast.” 
His harp on shoulder slung, he went, in quest of God,To burial-ground of Yathrab; sat down on the sod.Said he: “I’ll ask of God the hire of my harpstrings;For He accepts the heart’s most humble outpourings.” 
He harped awhile, and then he laid him down and wept.His harp his pillow was; upon a grave he slept. 
With sleep his soul was freed from prison and from pain,The harp and harper both were now made young again.   190His soul, free, wandered forth, exempt from all dull care,In spacious fields of heaven, the soul’s park, light as air.There he began to warble, merry as a lark:“O that I here might dwell without a care to carkHow joyous I should be in such a paradise;These sweet ethereal fields breathe balm, and myrrh, and spice.I’d wander all about; no need of feet or wings.All sweets I’d feast on; lips and teeth were useless things.My mind at rest, from all care free, I’d ever roam.The angels I’d not envy in their heavenly home.   195With bandaged eyes I’d survey realms without an end;All sorts of flowers I’d gather, yet not soil my hand.Like duck in pond, down deep I’d plunge in honey lake. In Job’s own fount I’d bathe, in wine .I’d revel make.For Job with wine from heaven was cleansed in every pore;From head to foot he came forth healed, without a sore.” 
If these poor rhyming verses covered heaven’s vast vault,They’d not tell half a tithe, they still would be at fault.The sum of heavenly joys I find an endless theme;My heart is far too narrow to embrace its scheme.   200The world I would enclose in my poor poem’s fold,Has lent my thoughts the wings that make their flight so bold.Were but that world in sight; its road, were it but known;Few souls would here remain, were but its glories shown. 
Commandment has been given: “Thou shalt not covetous be.”The thorn from out thy foot is drawn; thy thanks let’s see.“My Lord! My God!” loud cried our minstrel in that place,Those glorious realms of mercy, boundless shores of grace. 
About that time the Lord on ‘Umer slumber sent.205   He could not keep awake; beneath sleep’s burden bent.With wonder thought he ’twas unprecedented: “See!This sleep’s divinely ordered; purpose there must be.”His head he bowed; sleep bound him fast; a dream he saw,A voice from God he heard, — for him a sacred law. 
God’s voice the real source is of every cry and sound;The only voice, in fact; all other’s echo found.Turks, Kurds, and Persians, Arabs, all have understoodThat voice most wonderful, of lip and ear no mood. 
What say I? No! Not merely Turks and Persians all,210   The very rocks and trees have answered to that call.Each moment’s clearly heard: “Am I not, then, your Lord?” Ideas and essences became “things” at His word.Had they not answered: “Yes, Thou art our God, O Lord,”From out of nothing straight that answer ‘d come, in word! 
About what’s here been said respecting stocks and stones,Let’s hear what tell tradition’s most veracious tones.We’ll find related there how various rocks and trees,Both understood and spoke, as human being sees. 
A post in his own house, at Mustafà’s retreat,215   Sent forth a sob of grief, like heart in sorrow’s heat, 
As he his sermon preached, surrounded by his flock,So that the moan was heard by old and young; no mock.Disciples one and all were petrified, perplexed,And marvelled what might make its wooden heart so vexed.The Prophet put the question: “What may be thy need?”The column answered: “Prophet, grief my heart makes bleed. Against me, in thy sermon, thou’st been used to lean;A pulpit now thou’st mounted; far from me thou’rt seen.”The Prophet said: “Thou most affectionate of posts!Good fortune thee attend, sent by the Lord of Hosts!   220If thou so wish, thou mayst become a fruitful palm;And men from east and west sing of thy dates in psalm.Or God may thee transplant to realms of paradise;Where as a cedar thou eternally mayst rise.”It answered: “I elect what ne’er will know decay.”Lend ear, O heedless man! Hast thou less sense than they?That post was forthwith buried, like a corpse of clay,In hopes of resurrection at the judgment day.Thou hence mayst learn that any whom the Lord doth call,Breaks straightway with the things of this our earthly ball.   225Whoe’er receives a mission from the Lord his God,Forsakes the world, himself prepares the path to plod. 
Who’s not received the gift of knowledge from above,Will ne’er believe a stock could sigh and moan for love.He may pretend to acquiesce; not from belief;He says: “’Tis so,” to ‘scape a name much worse than thief. 
All they who’re not convinced that God’s “Be” is enough,Will turn away their face; this tale they’ll treat as “stuff” 
By thousands are confessing Muslims, men of mark,230   By doubt most sadly haunted; faith they’ve not, one spark.Conformity with them is founded on surmise,And all their heart and conscience quieted with lies.’Tis Satan sows the seed of doubting in their breast,Like blind men they will fall into the pit at last. 
Mere reasoners are cripples, propped on wooden leg;And, like such cripple, often falling as they beg.How different’s a pillar of our holy creed!As mountain he is steadfast; faith his living meed.A blind man’s leg’s his staff; upon it he must lean,235   Or he will risk to fall at full length on the green.A knight is he who sole has routed hosts of foes;Wise leader then becomes of liegemen’s ranks through woes.Those blind men find their way by trusting to a staff.They lean upon a creature; their sight is in a gaff.For, otherwise, they’d be far-seeing; they’d be kings;As ’tis, they’re blind, they’re corpses, — lifeless, senseless things.The blind can never sow, and surely never reap;They cannot edify; their talent they must keep.If ‘twere not for God’s mercy, favour, and free grace,240   Their staff of reason ‘d snap; they ‘d fall prone on their face. 
That staff’s a weapon made for quarrelling and fight;Then break it up in pieces, man of feeble sight!That staff was given thee, to help thee on thy way;With it men’s faces strikest thou, angry, ev’ry day. 
What’s this you’re doing, blind ones? What are you about?Some constables call in, to calm this frightful rout. 
Fall down, and Him entreat, who furnished you with staff.Look well, and see what signs your weapon may engraff. 
Consider Moses’ miracle; reflect on Ahmed’s too.One’s staff became a serpent; one’s post chose what is true.   245From that staff came a serpent; from this post, loud moan.Five times a day for praise we hear the crier’s tone.This trouble otherwise had been a senseless suit;So many miracles, so very little fruit. 
What’s reas’nable the mind can easily allow,No need’s there then for miracle, for tide to ebb and flow.The plan of miracles unreasonable count;But know it is accepted; faith it does not daunt. 
Just like as demons, and as wild beasts, out of dreadOf man, fled to the wilds, when envy reared its head,   250So, out of dread of miracles by prophets wrought,Do cavillers take refuge in sophisms of thought.In name, they’re Muslims; and, by virtue of their wiles,We can’t know what they are; their faces are all smiles.Precisely as false-coiners on their metal baseA coat of silver put, the sovereign’s name then trace,In word, God’s unity confessed, and holy law,Their hearts are like the poison-grain in sweet kickshaw.Not Venus will convince a sophist in debate;But true religion speaks, confutes his postulate.   255His body’s like a stock, his spirit’s but a stone.Howe’er he contradict, them God directs alone.In words, mayhap, he may detect a hitch or two;But his own soul and body witness God is true. 
Some stones were held in hand by Abū-Jahl one day. Said he to Muhammed: “What hold I here? Now say. 
Since thou’rt a prophet, tell: What hold I in my hand?The secrets of high heaven thou claimest to command.” 
Said Muhammed: “How can’st suppose I should not tell?260   The things themselves shall speak. I’m truthful; they know well.”Said Abū-Jahl: “This last pretension’s harder still.”To him replied the Prophet: “They’ll obey God’s will.’ 
From out of his closed hand a chorus now burst forth;Confession of God’s unity; His Prophet’s worth:“There is no god but God,” the stones distinctly sang;“Muhammed is God’s prophet,” also clearly rang. 
When Abū-Jahl this heard, he cast the stones away,In anger from his hand, as then he dared to say:Most surely no magician ever was like thee.265   Magicians’ chief art thou; crown on their heads thou’lt be.” 
May dust alight upon his head, blind miscreant!’Twas Satan closed his inward sight; — cursed recusant. 
Now turn we once again to hear the minstrel’s tale,For all this time he’s waiting; anxious, wan, and pale.The heavenly voice the Caliph called: “Ho! ‘Umer! Ho!Our servant’s want relieve; set thou him free from woe.A servant whom we hold in very high esteem,In public burial-ground, go, visit; him redeem.From out the public treasury do thou extract270   Seven hundred golden sequins, with due care and tact.To him deliver them; and say: ‘O man of good,For present needs let this suffice; ‘twill give thee food.Thy harpstrings’ hire it is. Go hence; and when ’tis done,Do thou again come hither; look for me alone.’” 
At sound of that dread voice did ‘Umer now awake,And straight himself disposed that task to undertake. 
Towards the burial-ground he turned his steps amain,The money in his breast, to seek the stranger, fain.He walked about the ground, right, left, and everywhere.No second soul was seen; the minstrel only there.   275 
Thought he: “This cannot be my quest.” So, off againHe wandered; still no other offered; this was plain.He said within himself: “The Lord of servant spake,Devout, approved, accepted, loved for God’s own sake.An ancient minstrel this. Of God can he be loved?Some mystery is here. Hail, riddle, by God moved!Once more he wandered o’er the spacious burial-ground,As lion seeking for his prey goes round and round.Convinced at length no other was there choice to make,He thought: “When I’m in doubt, light from above I take.”   280Respectfully he then approached the sleeping guest.A sneezing seized him. Straight the harper woke from rest. 
When °timer he espied, he marvelled, sore amazed;And rose to go away. Fear’s tremor held him dazed.He thought: “O Lord, have mercy Thou on me!This magistrate austere no harper ‘ll kindly see.” 
Now ‘Umer him considered; saw he was afraid;His cheeks all pale and wan; looks, modest as a maid;Then said: “Fear not! From me seek not to go away;Good tidings from on high to thee I bring this day.   285Of thee the Lord hath spoken in terms of highest praise.The heart of ‘Umer’s moved to love thee and thy lays.Be seated, then, by me, as friend by side of friend;While I to thee impart the message God doth send.The Lord doth thee salute; thy welfare doth inquire;Trusts thou’st supported well all thy afflictions dire.This trifle sends for present needs, as harpstrings’ worth.When it is spent, come here again, and fear not dearth.” 
The old man trembled as he heard those words so kind;290   His finger in astonishment he bit; — near lost his mind.Then cried aloud: “O God! Thou all-unequalled One!In my old age I sink for shame; this mercy I’ve not won.” 
A torrent, now, of tears, he shed, in anguish deep;His harp then dashed to pieces. Why it longer keep?He thus apostrophised it: “O thou source of ill!Thou’st barred me from heaven’s path, as highwaymen who kill.My blood thou’st sucked these seventy years, thou thing of shame!Through thee I’m rendered vile in eyes of men of fame.O Lord, Most Merciful! Thou giver of all good!295   My past life pardon, squandered ill, in heedless mood!” 
Man’s life’s a gift of God. Alas! How few will think!The value of each moment’s great, so near death’s brink.I’ve spent my life, not thinking how the moments fly.I’ve sung and harped as though a man should never die.Alas! that I in singing songs of mirth and glee,Entirely had forgot that death would visit me.Alas! that shrillest notes have set my ears in flames,And scorched my heart to shamelessness! Sad names!Alas! the gamut’s intervals were heard all night.300   The day has dawned; the caravan passed with the light.My God! Help, help! Me save front him who cries for help!Protection I implore from self; — I, who thus yelp!I never shall obtain my right, except through craft.For craft is german more to me than self ingraft.By craft this self itself doth rear across my way.Beyond my craft myself I see, when craft’s at bay.Just like as when a man is telling gold with thee.Alone it thou considerest, — self thou dost not see. 
So did the harper weep, and loudly did complain.His sins he numbered up, committed in life’s train.   305 
To him then ‘Umer: “This contrition deep of thineIs proof thou sober art, though grief thy heart entwine.Thy worldly journey’s over, other path now take;For this sobriety’s a sin thou must forsake.Sobriety’s a virtue in the road thou’st trod.The past and future both are curtains hiding God.Set fire to both of them! How long wilt thou remainPartitioned up by diaphragms like a reed cane?So long as reed has diaphragms, it’s not our friend;With lips and voice of ours its notes it cannot blend.   310So long as thou goest round the house, thou waverer art; But when thou’st entered, then full ease reigns in thy heart.O thou, whose knowledge of full knowledge is not half,Contrition is, with thee, worse than thy fault, mooncalf.Thou’rt contrite for the past. On what occasionWilt thou contrition feel for this contrition?At one time worshipper thou wert of notes of harp;And now, like lover, thou ‘dst kiss sighs and moans so sharp.” 
Like mirror, ‘Umer having thus reflected truth,The harper’s heart received enlightenment, forsooth.   315He, spirit-like, became relieved of moan and smile.His old mind took its leave, his new heart was docile.Amazement fell upon him, stupor bathed each sense,Ecstatic trance then followed, earth and sky flew hence.A yearning and a longing past description.As I cannot explain; try thy perception.Such ecstasy, such words, beyond all mood and tense;Immersion total in God’s glorious effulgence. 
Immersion such, escape therefrom impossible;320   That sea henceforth to him became impassable. 
Our partial wisdom’s not part of omniscience,Until God’s promptings come its promptings to enhance.But when our souls are made those impulses to feel,That sea in waves straight rises, under which we reel. 
The story of the harper and his state now ends;Both harper and that state have grown to be our friends.The harper sealed his mouth from any further song.We, too, will leave his tale half told; it is too long. 
In order to attain to his high state of bliss,325   Had one a hundred lives, they might be staked for this.Be thou, then, like a falcon, ever on the wing,To catch that gnat, thy soul; sunlike, for ever sing.He casts himself, for love, from highest heaven’s height;If flagons empty, he with wine fills them, so bright. 
O spiritual Sun, transfuse Thou life to all.A new life give, O God, to this our earthly ball.Into the frames of men both life and soul infuseFrom out Thy hidden world, as water dost diffuse. 
The Prophet has informed us that, for warning’s sake,330   Two angels evermore sweet invocation make:“O God, dispensers bless! Do Thou them feed and tend!Give them ten thousandfold for every mite they spend!But hoarders, O our Lord God, in this lower scene,Do Thou afflict with loss, — no profit intervene!” 
How many hoardings better than dispensings are!Save in God’s service, wealth of God spend not. Take care!So mayst thou get in recompense a hundredfold.So mayst thou ‘scape the punishment of sins untold. 
Men offered up their camels as a sacrifice;In hopes their swords ‘gainst Mustafà would do service.   335Seek thou the will of God from him who has it learnt;Not into every soul has God’s will been inburnt.The Prophet’s words forewarned those sons of heedlessness,That all such offerings are a heap of worthlessness.In war with God’s apostle, chiefs of Mekka allSuch sacrifices offered, ghostly aid to call. 
Just like the unjust steward, who, as justice due,The treasure of his lord bestowed on rebel crew.He falsely pictured to himself he’d justice wrought,With public money spent, the poor to terms he’d brought.   340Such justice from such culprit, what could it effect?His lord, to anger moved, excuses did reject. 
Hence is it, every Muslim, fearing he may stray,In his devotions begs: “Lead Thou us in right way.” Their substance to dispense suits men of generous mood.A lover’s ready gift’s his life for his love’s good.Dispense thou food for God’s sake; food thou’lt surely have.Lay down thy life for love of God; thy life thou’lt save. 
We see the trees here shed their leaves at God’s command.Without their toil or trouble, other leaves He’ll send.   345Shouldst thou, dispensing much, one day be found in want,The Lord will not forsake thee; His supply’s not scant.Whoever sows, must empty storehouses of grain;His fields will yield him richly tenfold heaps of gain.But he who’s left his corn in garners, to be used,Mules, horses, mice, and accidents have it reduced. 
This world’s a negative; the positive seek thou.All outward forms are cyphers; search, the sense to know. 
Lay down thy wretched life before th’ uplifted sword;350   New life thou’lt purchase, never-ending, of the Lord.But if thou do not know, well, how to quit this scene,To me, then, lend thy ear; this tale for thee I mean. 
In days of old there was a Caliph, as is said,Whose generosity Hātim Tāyī ‘d dismayed. His fame for liberality went through the land;All poverty, all want, relieved was at his hand.The very sea went dry through his dispensing zest;And rumours of his benefits spread east and west.A fruitful cloud of rain was he to this our race;355   In turn, the object he of God’s surpassing grace.So large his gifts, that seas and mines were out of date.Still fame brought caravans of suitors to his gate,His courts and halls the temples of the indigent.The noise had gone abroad how largely he had spent.The Persian, Roman, Turk, and Arab, all were there,And all admired his liberalities so rare.A Fount of Life was he, a very sea of gift.359   All nations profited, — in praise their voice did lift. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





IX. The Poor Scenite Arab and his Wife 
An Arab woman once thus to her husband spake,Insisting strongly he’d of these words notice take:“How very poor we are! What hardships have we borne!The whole world lives in pleasures; we’re the butt of scorn!We have no bread; for condiment we’ve grief and cares.Jug, pitcher we possess not; drink we naught but tears.By day, our only raiment’s scorching solar heat;Our bedclothes in the night, the moon’s rays pale and sweet.The disk of Luna we may well imagine bread.Our hands we lift to heaven; keen hunger’s pangs we dread.   5E’en mendicants feel shame at our dire poverty.Our days are dark as night, through drear adversity.Our kindred, as all strangers, sight of us now shun.Just like the wandering Jew, for fear we should them dun. When I would borrow half a handful of lentils,The neighbours wish me dead; their wrath on me distils.Amongst us Arabs pride is felt in war and gifts,Among those very Arabs thou’rt devoid of shifts.What need of war have we? We’re wounded; we are slain;The dart of want has pierced us through and through with pain.   10 
What need of faults, O sinless one? We’re in hell-fire!What solace have we? Overwhelmed with deep desire!What gifts have we to give? We silent beggars sit!Could we but seize a gnat, its throat we’d straightway slit!If guest should come to us, as sure as I’m alive,When he was sunk in sleep, to strip him we would strive.”Such grumblings, and as follows, going on all day,She made her husband wish her fifty miles away“Unbroken destitution’s brought us both to straits.15   My heart burns for our sorrows; hope’s gleam ne’er awaits.How long are we to suffer torture such as this?With hunger’s agony, like coals of fire we hiss.Should any stranger guest come unexpectedly,What shame we’d feel him to receive dejectedly.If any visitor should pass our way this eve,Unless we eat his sandals, what food can we give?” 
“Hence ’tis the wise have said in proverb, rendered free‘A guest should never go where he’ll not welcome be.’Who’d wish to be the guest confiding of a man,20   Who’ll strip thee to the skin, bare, gladly, if he can?Unhappy in himself, can he thee happy make?He can impart no light; deep gloom’s his only stake.Not feeling gladsome in himself, with others met,He cannot yield to them what he has not as yet.Suppose a man ophthalmic start as oculist;Of granite-dust alone will his eye-salves consist.So ’tis with all in times of misery and need;Let no one, then, come blindly to our house to feed.” 
Hast never seen reality of famine near?25   Look well at us; thou’lt see effects of food too dear.Our outward look is black, like dark pretender’s heart.This lacks enlightenment, though his exterior’s smart. 
He has no hope of God, nor any good to show,Though more than Seth or Adam he pretend to know.Ev’n Satan unto him no trace of self has shown,And yet he claims to be a Vicar of God’s own. Some Gnostic terms he uses as a plagiarist,That he may lead the people as though secretist.A critic, ‘sooth, is he; complains of Bāyezīd; Whereas Yezīd himself would blush at his bald creed.   30Of heavenly bread and table, nothing has he known;The barest bone to him, vile dog, God has not thrown.He pompously proclaims: “My table have I spread;Vicegerent’s son, God’s Vicar, here am I indeed!Then welcome, all ye simpletons! Come in; Come in!From table of my bounty fill yourselves within.”For years he dupes them with “To-morrow’s” promise still.The arrant arch-deceiver, whose “To-morrow’s” nil. 
A long time is required to sound a human mind,To find out what defects may lurk the mask behind.   35A buried treasure is there under body’s wall?Or is it hole of serpent, toad, or scorpion, all?At length when ’tis discovered, impostor is he,His pupil’s life is wasted; what use then to see? 
But on some rare occasion, pupil of great partsWill come to the impostor, profit by his arts.He comes with good intention to the lecture-hall,Expects a guiding soul; he finds a carcase; all.As when, in dead of night, one does not know the east, To offer one’s devotion’s licit, turning west.   40 
Pretenders carry famine in their heart of hearts.We suffer only want of bread for our repasts.Why, then, pretender-like, should we our want disguise?Why, for appearance’ sake, our soul, too, bastardise? 
The woman’s husband answered: “Pray now, silence keep!Our life is most part o’er. What’s left us but to weep?” 
“The wise man cares not for a little more or less.These both will pass away, like torrent’s waywardness.A torrent may be clear, or muddy, black as ink.45   It will not last. Why then should we about it think?” 
“Within this world what millions, living creatures all,A life of joy still lead, quite free from let or fall.A dove is always cooing praises to the Lord,Upon a tree, so long as day may light afford.A nightingale sings hymns, God’s name to bless alway.For unto Thee he trusts, Who hearest us when we pray.A falcon, when he sits upon a royal fist,No longer stoops to carrion, wherewith to subsist.And so from gnat to elephant like state we find,50   They all depend on God, the best of feeders’ kind.” 
“All those anxieties that fall on us like darts,Are but the vapours, tempests, of our human hearts.Those cares are like a sickle, made to cut us down.This is a fact, though we are slow the truth to own.Our ev’ry suffering, here, a portion is of death.This part of death, then, drive away whilst thou hast breath.If from this part of death thou findst thou canst not run;Thou’rt sure whole death will follow, as the light the sun.If thou canst learn to think this part of death is sweet,55   Thou knowest that God will make its whole thy tastes to meet. 
Our troubles are the heralds of our death to come.Turn not thy face away from herald, as do some.”“Whoever leads a joyous life finds death severe.And he who’s slave to body, mars his soul’s career.When sheep come home from pasture in the meadows green,The fattest ones are slaughtered, soon as they are seen.The night is spent, the morn is come, my bosom friend,When wilt thou bring thy grumbling gossip to an end?Once thou wert young, and more content a hundred-fold;Then covetous becamest, though thyself art gold.   60A fruitful vine thou wert; a blight’s come over thee;Thy fruit will never ripe, ‘twill shrivel on the tree.Sweet fruit, with flavour, give, thy inward worth to prove.Thou backwards shouldst not walk, as ropemakers all move.Thou art my helpmate fond; and fellow-workers all,Of one mind still should be, or their joint work must fall.A pair should ever be conformable in aim.A pair of shoes examine; pair of boots, the same.If one boot of a pair be too small for the foot,The pair is useless; vain, the other’s size to moot.   65One boot is small; the other, ‘haps, too large is found.Hast ever known a lion consort with a hound?Two packs upon a camel equipoise require;The one must not be half, the other bale entire.I choose the road that leads straight to contentment’s door,Why takest thou the path to sin and misery’s floor?”The woman’s husband, suffering, but resigned still,Thus spake unto his wife, to calm her restive will. 
The woman raised a shout: “O man of simple mind!I will no longer listen to thy words, though kind.   70Talk not to me of claims, pretensions, and such stuff.I care not one pin’s point for pride and flimsy fluff. 
Why preach so loud of sentiment and honour’s call?Just look at our condition. Shame upon thee fall!Pride certainly is wrong; much worse in beggars’ camp.The day is cold and snowy; all our clothing’s damp.What nonsense and frivolity thy weak pate doles!And all the while thy tent, like cobweb, ‘s full of holes.Where didst thou learn contentment’s rule to make thy pride?75   Has thy contentment taught thee shame from men to hide?The Prophet has declared: ‘Content a treasure is.’But what knowest thou of treasure? Suffering’s all thy bliss.Contentment’s but a water-reservoir that leaks.Do hold thy tongue, thou plague; and cease these foolish freaks.Thou namest me thy helpmate; lower, pray, thy tone.I’m fellow unto justice; mate to knavery, none.Since thou equality with lords and princes claimest,Why suck the blood of locusts that by chance thou maimest?Thou fightest for a bone with dogs in this debate.80   How shall I not complain, with hunger at our gate?Don’t look at me contemptuously, and all askance.Lest I tell all my mind, thy baseness to enhance.Thou holdest thyself much wiser than poor soul like me.Hast ever found me wanting sense to make thee see?Think not to fall upon me, wolf-like, unawares,O thou at whose great wisdom woman’s folly stares!The wisdom thou so holdest superior to all,Not wisdom is; but serpent’s, scorpion’s, deadly gall.A foe may God prove ever to thy drivelling guile!85   So mayst thou turn out weaker than weak woman’s wile!Thou art both snake and snake-catcher, in one combined.A serpent-charming serpent! Arab’s pride enshrined! 
Did crows but realise their ugliness supreme,As white as snow they’d change, through rage and arrant shame.A charmer sings a charm against a snake, his foe;The snake charms him in turn; hence follows boundless woe.Were not his trap a charm prepared by the snake,Would he become the victim of some small mistake?The charmer first is caught in toils of greed and lust.And sees not ’tis the snake has charmed him, bound him fast.   90The snake addresses him: ‘O charmer! See now! Look!Thy own work thou perceivest, my wiles hast mistook.Thou charmest in God’s name to make me thy bond-slave,And lead me captive, make me sport for fool and knave.The name of God it is that holds me fast enchained;That name thou usest as my trap. Art not soft-brained?That name will one day vengeance on thee for me take.In fear of that dread name, I, soul and body, quake.He’ll either take thy life with poison-fang of mine;Or, like me, unto prison He will thee consign!’”   95Thus spake the woman bitterly unto her spouse,Whole volumes would not hold the words that she let loose. 
He answered her: “My wife! Art woman? Art thou mad?‘My poverty’s my pride.’ Reproach me not when sad.Possessions, wealth, are but a cap the scalp to hide.The scaldheads or baldpates alone in caps confide.Whoever’s hair has grown in curls or tresses full.Is always proud when he his cap away can pull.A man of God resembles precious sense of sight.Our eyes should not be bandaged, or we can’t see right.   100 
The dealer who exposes slaves free from defects,Strips off the useless cloak that hides all ill effects.Were they not sound, would he the sheltering mantle strip?Nay! Contrary! With clothing he’d their vices clip,And say as an excuse: ‘He’s timid; she’s shamefaced,And shrinks from being here bare of vestments placed.’” 
“A man of wealth may full of sundry vices be.His riches are his mantle; none his failings see.Men all are covetous; their greed ’tis blinds them all,105   One touch of fellow-feeling binds them as one ball.But should a poor man say what’s precious more than goldHis saying is not heeded by the world so cold.”“The functions of a dervish far transcend thy ken.The aim of mendicancy’s folly to most men.True dervishes retire away from wealth and power.Their bread the Lord, majestic, furnishes each hour.Our God is just. When had it happened that the justHave acted with injustice towards the poor who trust?To one, all blessings God gives, favours, luxuries;110   Another one, at will, with coals of fire He tries.Who doubts that God thus acts with uncontrolled will,His portion be the fire of tribulation still.” 
“‘My poverty’s my pride’ is not an empty word,Therein are hid a thousand blessings well assured.In anger, imprecations thou hast cast on me.I am a humble suitor; snake-catcher thou’dst see.If e’er a snake I catch, I still extract its fangs,That harm may never follow, when its head one bangs.Those fangs are enemies to every serpent’s life,115   When I extract them, then, I make him free from strife.” 
“I never will submit to spell of lust and greed.For cov’tousness I’ve conquered. Its maw I’ll not feed. 
Thank God that greed is not among my sins, at least.Contentment fills my heart; — a true, perpetual feast.Thou lookest at the crown of pear-tree full of fruit,Come down from that idea; no good will it boot.In raising up thyself, thou giddy hast become;’Tis not the house that reels; thy brain’s grown troublesome.” 
“Once Abū-Jahl saw Ahmed; spitefully he said:Thou ugly portraiture from Banū-Hāshim bred!’   120Said Ahmed: ‘True thou’st spoken, most veracious man;Thy words are worthy credit, let who cavil can!’Then Abū-Bekr saw him, said he was a sunOf perfect beauty; east, west, everywhere he’d run.To him, too, Ahmed answered: ‘Thou hast spoken true,O upright man, set free from all the nine spheres’ clew.’The company assembled marvelled at these words,And asked: ‘How can two contraries be what accords?’Said Ahmed then: ‘A mirror am I, polished bright.Both Turk and Hindū see in me reflection’s light.’”   125 
“O wife! If ever thou hast thought me covetous,Come forth from such idea, — too preposterous.That which thou takest for greed is heaven’s mercy, sure.And how can greed and mercy both at once allure?Make trial of true poverty, but for one day, or two.Thou’lt find therein true riches, with contentment, too.Be patient with our poverty, and banish grief;For poverty’s a crown bestowed by our great Chief.Put off sour looks and see, how many thousand souls,Through sweet contentment are as happy as the fowls.   130See other thousands, also, drinking dregs of grief:It permeates their being, as sugar scents roseleaf.” 
“Alas! Thou wast a treasure valued by my heart!I loved to pour my soul forth in thy ears apart! 
A kind of milk is speech; its teat the soul, — or gland.To make it freely flow requires a loving hand.If but the hearer listen, hang upon his lips,The speaker, though a corpse, grows eloquent, ne’er trips.Attentive audiences still confer the powers,135   To stutterers and stammerers, to speak for hours.If strangers should break in upon my privacy,My womenkind retire, from mere delicacy.But if my visitor be confidant and kin,They come forth freely, play about with gladsome din.Whatever best they know, of work, or play, or jest,They do and say, for show, before a welcome guest.What use of sound of harp, of bass or treble notes,For deaf or senseless ear, that on no music dotes?” 
“Our God has made the earth, the sky, and all between;140   His light, and eke His fire, upon that stage is seen.The Lord without a purpose gave not musk its scent.For odour ’twas, not for diseased nostrils, meant.The earth He stretched forth, and fixed as man’s abode.The heavens He upreared to be by angels rode.Th’ inferior creature, man, ‘s at strife with all on high;He bids for every place he sees, for all he’ll sigh.” 
“Dear wife! Chaste, modest matron! Art thou well preparedInto the tomb to sink, ere thy doomed hour’s declared?Were I to fill the earth with pearls of countless price,145   Thy daily bread thee failing, could they thee entice?Then cease from all contention, strive not ‘gainst the Lord,Or separation from thee will be my last word.What taste have I for strife, contention, or annoy,When even in peacemakings I’ve no longer joy?Be quiet! Hold thy peace! Or, by the Lord of life,I’ll quit this tent for ever; thou’lt not be my wife! 
Much better to walk barefoot than with shoe too small!The toil of travel’s sweeter than strife in one’s wall!” 
She knew, thence, he was angered; — will had of his own;She burst in tears. Was ever woman tearless known?   150Quoth she: “I’d never thought from thee such words to hear;Far different had I hoped; knew not I’d aught to fear.”She made herself most servile, thing of small amount;Remarked: “Thy humble servant am I; so me count.My soul and body, all I have, ‘s at thy command;Sole arbiter art thou; dispose; I’ll not withstand,If I of poverty impatiently complained,Not for myself, for thee, was our sad lot disdained.In all afflictions thou our remedy hast been;I grieve to see thee want; my anguish thence grows keen.   155Dear, darling spouse 1 For thee was all my deep dismay;My sighs and moans for thee came into bitter play.I call my God to witness, in my heart and mind,I’m ready life to lay down, if thou’rt so inclined.O that thy heart, the life with which my soul’s endued, — Could trace aright the channel by my thoughts pursued!If merely through suspicion thou art vexed with me,My life I value not; breath, — body’s naught! Just see.I scorn all gold and silver, count them less than dirt,If they to thee bring anguish. No! I’m no such flirt.   160Thine is the only picture painted on my heart;And canst thou talk of leaving me, from home depart?Discard me, if thou wilt. Thou hast the right and power,O thou for whose divorce excuse I make each hour!Recall to mind the time when I thy idol was,And thou, priest-like, didst worship me! Alas! Alas!My heart I cultivated just as thou desiredst.Thou thoughtest ’twas fond. I knew thou it with love inspiredst. 
Like potherbs o’er the fire, thou addedst what thou wouldst,165   Sharp vinegar, or honey. What thou wishedst, thou couldst.If blasphemy I’ve uttered, lo, I faith profess!My life is in thy hands; but, be not pitiless!I wot not thou wouldst prove imperious, like a king;So, like an ass turned loose, before thee took my fling.Thy pardon now I crave. Let me know joy again!Contention I forswear, repentance I maintain.With sword and winding-sheet I fall at my lord’s feet;Should he decapitate me, death to me’ll be sweet.Thou’st talked of separation; — bitter, worse than gall;170   Do what thou will with me, that hideous word recall.In thee, for me, a pleader ever will be found;If I be mute, thou’lt still hear intercession’s sound.My potent advocate is, in thyself, thy heart;Relying upon that, I dared to sin, with art.Have mercy slily, — see thy grace thyself not, Lord!To me far sweeter than a honeycomb full stored!” 
Thus pleaded she; in coaxing, wheedling terms, with skill.Her tears rolled down in streams, fast coursing at her will.Her weeping and her sighs were past endurance felt,175   Whose features, tearless, e’en his heart of steel could melt.That shower precursor was of lightning’s vivid gleam,Whose flash’ lit in his breast a fire, with pity’s beam.She, of whose beauty was a slave her husband still,A double spell exerted through entreaty’s thrill. 
One, whose least coolness sets man’s heart in flames,By turning supplicant a twofold witchery claims.If he, whose pride at times pain causes to thy mind,To supplication stoop, thou’lt small resistance find. 
He, whose fierce tyranny our bleeding hearts most grieves,By tendering excuses, us excuseless leaves.   180“Is goodly made to man” ‘s a text from God’s own word;As truth made manifest, is by man ever heard.God, too, therein decreed: “that he with her may dwell;” Whence Adam’s love for Eve survived lost Eden’s dell.A hero man may be, a Hercules to grieve,But slave to woman’s will is he, without reprieve.He, to whose words the universe has all bowed down, Was he who sang: “Humayrā, speak to me!” Life’s crown! 
Of fire and water, fire is quelled through water’s wet;Still, water boils through fire, when in a cauldron set.   185The cauldron, like a veil, those lovers keeps apart;And water’s influence no longer cools fire’s heart.To outward show, as water, thou mayst rule thy wife;In stern reality, thou cleavest to her, — thy life.This attribute, humanity must own its force:“Man quails to sensual love,” which springs from failing’s source.The Prophet hath declared that woman, over sage,Despotic power e’er wields, and over men of age;That fools the upper-hand o’er women still maintain,   190Because they’re harsh, gross, senseless, careless to cause pain.No gentleness, no pity, faith, or ruth have they;In that a bestial nature o’er them holds its sway.Humanity ’tis claims, for self, love, charity;While lusts and rage are marks of bestiality.Fair woman is a ray from out the sun of Truth;Not loved? A creator; not created, forsooth. 
The husband, now, contrition felt for what he’d said,As sinner, at death’s door, repents of evil deed.Thought he: “I have assailed the life of my life’s life;195   I’ve plagued and broke the heart of my dear darling wife!” 
When God decrees an ill, man’s judgment falls asleep.And perspicacity knows not which way to leap.The doom of ill struck home, man straight feels deep regret;Propriety outraged, he turns to mourn and fret. 
Addressing, then, his wife, he said: “My shame is great!I’ve acted as a heathen, ah! I’m ready to entreat!‘Gainst thee I’ve trespassed, prithee, pardon to me grant;Upon me vengeance wreak not, root not up the plant?An infidel, however old, if he confess his sin, Thy200   And make amends, God’s sheepfold opes and takes him in.Thy heart is full of pity, goodness, kindness, grace;All being, eke nonentity, ‘s in love with thy sweet face.True faith, e’en blasphemy, adores thy majesty;With that elixir all to gold turns instantly.” 
In Moses and in Pharaoh parables we see.’Twould seem that Moses’ faith was right; Pharaoh’s sin’s fee.By day would Moses pray unto the Lord of Hosts;At midnight Pharaoh, too, bewailed his impious boasts,And said: “Thou, Lord, this yoke upon my neck didst lay;205   Were’t not for yoke imposed, the egotist who’d play?’Tis Thou’st enlightened Moses’ mind, of Thy free grace;And hence hast left me blindly groping on my face.The countenance of Moses Thou’st lit up, like day;My heart, like moon eclipsed, Thou’st darkened with dismay.My star was never brighter than the full-faced moon;When darkened with eclipse, it surely sets too soon. 
True, kings and princes sound my praises in their routs;My star eclipsed, the rabble raise their clamorous shouts:With cleavers, marrowbones, tongs, pokers, hideous ‘larm,They seek to fright some monster; really, shame all charm.   210Alas for Pharaoh, with those fearful yells and noise!Alas his ‘Lord Supreme,’ drowned in that discord’s voice!Both I and Moses servants are of Thee, our King;Like woodman’s axe on tree, Thy wrath on me takes swing.Some boughs Thou loppest, to plant. They quickly grow again.Some others but as firewood burn, or moulder on the plain.What can the bough, to cope with axe’s severing edge?Can bough resist, return the blow, as blackRumi’s sledge?I call on Thy omnipotence! Thy axe withhold!Thy mercy manifest! These wrongs set right! Behold!”   215 
Then to himself did Pharaoh think: “O wondrous thing!All night I’ve prayed ‘Good Lord’ to heaven’s Almighty King!In secret I’m humility, a very worm!But when I Moses meet, how greatly changed my form!Base coin, if tenfold gilded o’er with finest gold,Upon the fire when cast, its baseness all behold!Are not my heart and body wholly in his hand?Why brain me, flay me, thus? So cunning, soft, and bland!Commandest Thou me to flourish? As cornfield I’m green.Decreest Thou me to wither? Straight I’m sallow seen.   220One day I’m bright as full moon; next, as eclipse dark.But is not this of all God’s works the constant mark?‘Be, and it is!’ A bat that drives man on, His laws!Of entity, non-entity, that course is cause! 
Th’ uncoloured being stained with colour’s various tinge,One Moses ‘gainst another’s certain to impinge.If th’ unconditioned state, that was, should e’er return,With Moses Pharaoh, then, may live in peace; not burn.” 
Does doubt invade thy bosom from this subtle theme?225   Think! When was colouredness exempt from doubt extreme?The wonder is how colour rose from hueless source;How colour, huelessness, in ceaseless warfare course!The origin of oil is water. This is known.Then why are oil and water foes, as may be shown?From water oil’s created by mysterious power;‘Gainst water why does oil rise up, and war, each hour?The rose springs from a thorn; thorns, from the rose.In open warfare are these two. Why? What suppose?Or is this seeming warfare all a cunning sham,230   Like donkey-dealers’ wordy strife, some dupe to flam?’Tis neither this nor that. ’Tis puzzle for the wise.The treasure’s to be sought; the ruin’s ‘fore our eyes. That which thou deemest the treasure’s naught but vanity.By deeming it a treasure, makest thou it to flee.Thy deemings and thy thoughts build up a pile too fair;For treasure never lurks where buildings crown the air.“To edify” means: “Being, warfare eke, to sow.”Non-entity is shamed with entity’s false show!Not entity ’tis calls for aid. It is the void235   For restitution asks, — encroachments would avoid!Think not ’tis thou wouldst flee non-entity’s fell grip;Non-entity encroachment dreads from thy short trip.Apparently, it thee invites unto its breast;But really, it repels; club-like is its protest. 
Know then, dear friend, that Pharaoh’s shrink from Moses’ callWas, really, like a wrong shoe on one’s foot. That’s all. 
Opinions are agreed ‘mongst philosophic folk:“The sky’s an eggshell; in it lies this globe, as yolk.” 
A questioner once asked: “How rests this little ballWithin the circumambient spheres, without a fall?   240’Tis like a lamp hung up to vault of high-pitched dome;It never sinks below, nor soars above its home.” 
To him one wise man answered: “By attraction’s force,On all sides equal poised, it’s kept from all divorce.Just as an iron ball would centrally be hung,If loadstone vault there were to hold it freely swung.” 
A caviller objected: “How should heaven’s pure vault,Attracting to itself, this vile black ball exalt?Say rather it repels with equal force all round.The earth thus rests amidst air’s tides that hold it bound.”   245 
Thus is it by repulsion from the souls of saints,The Pharaohs of each age are fixed in error’s taints.Repelled, then, they are from this world and the next;In neither have they portion; shunned are they, and vexed.From God’s anointed ones dost thou draw back in heart?Know, thy existence grieves them, frets them, makes them smart.They’re like the amber, then. When chafed, it shows its power.The mote of thy existence quick they’ll force to cower.If they conceal that power, — exert it not for thee,All thy docility will turn to pride. Thou’lt see.   250 
E’en as the bestial quality, in man aye found,Unto its human yokemate slave and serf is bound.This human element, too, in saints’ hands, my friend,Is pliant, like the bestial; to their wish they’t bend. 
By true faith, Ahmed called the world, his docile sons,To table spread: “Say: ‘Servants mine!’” Thus God’s text runs. 
Thy mind’s a camel-driver; thou, the camel, still,Urged by decree: “Command!” it drives thee as it will.God’s saints are minds of minds. Men’s minds, beneath their sway,255   Are camels, too. And thus the lengthening series play.Look unto them, then, if the truth thou’dst fully know;A pilot is the life of thousands, here below,But what are pilots? Camel-drivers what? Still seekThou one whose eye looks on the sun, and feels not weak.The world’s plunged, nailed, in thickest pitchy dark of night;For day to break, it wants the rise of God’s sunlight. 
Behold a sun for thee, in mote contained and hid;A rampant lion, clad in pelt of gentlest kid.Behold a hidden sea, beneath a blade of grass.260   Beware! Tread not thereon in doubt. Thou sink’st, alas!Doubt and incertitude, when felt in pious breast,Are mercies from on high; a leader gives them rest.A prophet ‘s sole and solitary in the world.Sole; but within him bears a thousand systems furled.As though by magic, the vast universe he makesAround himself revolve, who smallest compass takes. 
The fools saw him alone; thence judged him some weak thing!Weak can he ever be who’s upheld by the King?Those fools thought: “He’s a man. He’s really nothing more.” Alas, for fools! They’re void of common sense in store.   265 
The prophet Sālih’s camel was, in form, a beast; His people her hamstrung; ’twas ignorance, at least.They cut her off from water; drink they her refused.Ungrateful such return for meat and drink they’d used!“God’s camel” drank the water brought as dew by mists.God’s water they held back from God. Monopolists!Thus Sālih’s camel, as of saint the fleshly form,Became an ambush; — sinners’ ruin thence would storm!Upon that sinning race what dreadful judgment fell!“God’s camel and her drink” the text is, us to tell.   270God’s vengeance, as pursuer, sought front that vile crew.The price of her shed blood, a country’s whole space through. 
The soul to Sālih’s like; his camel is the flesh;The soul communes with God; the flesh pines in want’s mesh.Good Sālih’s soul was safe from effort of their whim;His camel felt the blow they dared not aim at him.No hurt could fall on Sālih’s soul, — that priceless gem, — Such holy emanation was not sport for them.The soul unto the flesh is joined, by God’s decree,That it may be afflicted, — trials made to see.   275Who hurts a body hurts also its soul, no doubt;The life-blood in that vase from being’s fount was brought.God enters in relation with material form,That He may be asylum to each earthborn worm. 
No man can inlet find to injure soul of saint;An oyster-shell is crushed; its pearl escapes attaint.Then serve the camel; that is, list to saint in flesh;And with his righteous soul thou’lt serve one Lord afresh. 
When Sālih saw the evil deed they’d foully wrought,280   In three days’ time a judgment from his God he sought.“Three days from hence,” said he, “affliction will befall;Of which, three signs precursors shall be. You’ll see, all.The colour of your faces shall be changed to view;Complexions various shall be seen in each of you.Upon the first day, saffron’s hue shall be their tinge;The second, scarlet red each countenance shall fringe;And on the third, as black as coal shall be each face;Upon which ensuing, God’s wrath shall then take place.If sign of me you ask for truth of what I say,285   Observe the path that camel’s foal shall take to-day;Then strive to catch it. If you can, by chance, succeed;Good. If not, hope is gone; — from bow the arrow’s freed!” 
No one of them the camel’s foal could overtake.It fled among the hills, — was lost to sight. Heartache!E’en so the soul, when once its prison bars are burst,Unto the Lord of Grace its winged flight takes first.The prophet then: “The threatened judgment now must storm;All hope’s gone by; — dead as that camel’s lifeless form.Still, if, by coaxing, you her foal can win back here,290   In calm tranquillity, from whence it’s fled through fear,With its return of confidence you may be saved;But otherwise, despair and gnash your teeth, depraved!” 
His threat they heard; dejected were at its import.Their looks sank downcast; — sad anxiety’s resort.The first day came; they saw each visage jaundiced o’er;And thence, in fell dismay, they laments uttered, sore. 
Their scarlet skins, the second day, told plainer still,Time for repentance was but short, and hope was nil.The blackened faces, on the third day, clearly toldThe prophet’s threat was strictly true. Their blood ran cold.   295 
Thus being brought to quit their menaces and scowls;Upon their knees, hams, breasts, they crouched like roosting fowls.This cringing posture has that abject, trembling crew,In holy writ, inspired, dubbed “crouching;” and ’tis true.(Kneel, thou, at times when by instructors thou art taught,And when thou’rt warned that “crouching” ‘s with abjection fraught.)In hopeless expectation God’s blow to ensue,The countryside entire within their homes withdrew. 
The prophet Sālih left his cell to view the town.Enveloped in a smoke and blaze he saw it drown!   300Low, moaning noise he heard proceed from its remain; — Sighs, as it were, and sobs; — he sighers sought in vain!Those sighs were fitful cracklings of their burning bones;Those sobs, the hissings of their blood, in clots, on stones! 
On hearing these sad sounds the prophet burst in tears;Responsive to those moans, he groaned. — No listening ears!The dead he then addressed: “O people, chid in vain!How often ‘gainst you to the Lord I’ve wept, with pain!The Lord me answered: ‘Patience have with their misdeeds;To them give counsel still; not long will last those needs!’   305Remark I made: ‘With such misdeeds will counsel count?As milk, kind counsel flows from love’s unsullied fount!’The untold wrongs you’d heaped upon my patient headHad curdled milk of counsel in my bosom’s stead. 
The Lord replied: ‘A grace I’ll now on thee bestow;I’ll soothe the wounds inflicted by their rancour’s bow.’With that, God made my heart as tranquil as of yore;Swept clean away the cobwebs of your paltry score.” 
“Again I proffered counsel to you, sage and safe;310   In parables soft couched, with words that might not chafe.Once more that milk flowed, mixed with honey, from my lips;The dulcet tones were tempting, not like stinging whips.Alas! Within your ears they all to venom turned;Because, like poisonous plants, your nature goodness spurned.Why do I weep? You’ve burnt the substance of all grief;Like bone in throat, ye obstinate, you’ve choked relief!Ought any to lament when grief is laid in bier?Man justly tears his hair, his head if broke by spear!” 
With that, reproachfully upon himself he turned,315   And cried: “Those fellows were not worth the tears they spurned.Recite not wrongfully, O master of address,The text: ‘How will I grieve’ o’er crew that none should bless!’”Still, in his eyes and heart more briny tears he found,A pity, really motiveless, in him ‘d ta’en ground.As summer-rain he wept, through feeling ill at ease;A summer-rain, quite cloudless, from compassion’s seas.His conscience smote him sore: “Why weepest thou, man of sense?Are they of tears fit objects, — men of violence?What motive for thy tears? Say. Grievest thou for their acts?320   Mournest thou th’ extinction of their merciless, vile pacts? 
Or is’t, perchance, their hearts, corrupt, gangrened, thou’dst weep?On their empoisoned tongues, so adderlike, thou’dst keep?Those tails and fangs is’t, are the objects of thy grief?Their scorpion claws and sting that thou regrettest in chief?Contentiousness, foul mockery, rude violence?Thank God, instead, who’s checked their boastful insolence!Their hands were evil; evil were their feet, their eyes;Their peace, their friendship, as their wrath, were all unwise.From rule of meek obedience, customs handed down,They’d swerved; — to follow mere devices of their own.   325They wished not for a teacher, asses obstinate;Their own ideas alone they’d stoop to cultivate.God therefore sent His servants, smoke and fire to wit,From heaven, the miscreants to chase to dire hell-pit.” 
Behold the damned and blessed, thus, in one scene conjoined;Between them is “a great gulf fixed by none o’erclimbed.” Those “sons of fire” and “light” together seemed immixed;But barrier impassable ‘tween them was fixed.The mine’s rich golden ore in soil imbedded lies;But really separated, far as eagle flies.   330Like pearls and jet beads in one row of necklace ranged;A motley company, like inn’s chance guests, oft changed.Or like an estuary, half soft, sweet to drink,Most palatable water, clear, bright as moon’s twink;The other half salsuginous, wormwood and gall,Foul, black as ink, and fetid, shocks the senses all.These dash together; now this, now that, uppermost;Their waves a turmoil make, as though by tempest tost. 
That show of fierce collision’s made by matter’s form;335   In truth, the spirits ’tis that compacts make, or storm.When gentle waves, in friendship’s reign, roll gracefully,Contention quits each breast, all goes on merrily.With rough war’s hideous billows, (mark the altered scene!)All love is straight renounced; dire hate’s to supervene.Affection coaxes rancour to subside, appeased;Because its origin’s in reason fixed, soon pleased;While raging anger stirs up thoughts of bitter strife.For how can man be tranquil, when the stake’s his life? 
Our outward eye discerns not pure from tainted hearts;340   Futurity’s small lattice oped, the curtain parts.The eye of true sagacity distinct can see;This other eye, ’tis, fails; — is ne’er from error free.How many seeming pleasures, fair, as sugar sweet,Have poison lurking in them, death to all they meet!Men of discernment know them surely by mere smell;And others find them out, though late, when tasted, fell.That taste’s. enough; ejected are they; swallowed, not;Although the fiend may urge, with: “Eat, while hot!”Again some others find in throat they firmly stick;345   And others yet are vexed with intestinal prick.Still others by sharp purgings find they’ve done amiss;Indulgence of the palate’s changed to pangs their bliss.Again there are some suffer after months or years;And others pay the penalty within the tomb, with tears.E’en should there chance a respite, granted in the grave,At resurrection’s trump, disclosure naught will save. 
Each plant, each honied morsel, in this lower sphere,A term has, fixed, him to affect who tastes the cheer.What ages of submission to sun’s influence,E’er ruby can acquire ripe tinge, bright effulgence!350   The salad cress is ready in a month or two;The rose requires some years before it shows its hue. 
To this end has the Lord, whose name be ever blessed,In holy writ declared: “Appointed term.” We’ve cessed.Hast thou this heard? Read, mark, and learn with diligence!Life’s water is it. Hast thou drunk? Health spring from thence!Those words thou mayst consider life’s fount, if thou list;Their sense it is important thou shouldst not have missed. 
One other theme, my friend, fix firmly in thy mind.’Tis patent as thy soul; as subtle thou’lt it find.   355At times as venomous as adder’s fatal fang;At times as healthful as the food from heaven that sprang.Now lethal; now again remedial, by God’s will.At one time blasphemy; then, holy rapture’s thrill.Thus will it, now, be fatal to a human soul;And then, again, a remedy for all that’s foul:“The juice of unripe grapes is sour, as is well known;But when the fruit has ripened, sweet and fragrant grown,In wine-jar when fermented, nauseous and unclean;When vinegar, again, most wholesome is it seen.”   360 
If saint a poison swallow, wholesome it will prove;But if disciple taste it, death will him remove.“Lord, grant unto me,” was the prayer of Solomon,“The power and kingdom solely (not to Abaddon);This favour grant not unto other after me!” Which reads like envy. Such, however, it can’t be.Put not, in heart, construction that must disagreeUpon those words so read: “to other after me.”He saw a thousand dangers in the sway conferred;Saw that earth’s empire is a snare to be abhorred;   365A danger to one’s life, one’s faith, one’s inner self;Such trial has no equal on the whole world’s shelf. 
E’en Solomon sagacity did much require,To shield him from mistakes in all his vast empire.The wondrous power he wielded could alone suffice,To quell rebellion’s perils, rising in a trice.So when he rested from due ordering his wide realm,He felt that other kings misrule might overwhelm.Then interceded he: “This rule, this much-prized flower,370   Vouchsafe to none, save with the selfsame power.To whom Thou mayest it grant upon these very terms,He’s Solomon, he is myself, my sway confirms.He’ll not come after me, he’ll reign with me indeed;With me and in me, free from rival’s dreaded meed.” 
This to expound appeared a duty paramount;Return we, and our tale of man and wife recount. 
A sequel to that incident ‘tween man and wifeIs looked for by the mind of him who’s watched their life.The incident of man and wife recounted here375   Of each man’s soul and flesh the parable is, clear.The wife the flesh is; man’s the soul; he’s wisdom, too;They’re emblems also of all good and evil, true.The two, of need, existing in this earthly home,By day and night at war are; — always quarrelsome.The wife requires her various household garniture,Her bed and board, her comfort, and her furniture.The flesh, like woman, to be gratified still seeks;Submissive sometimes; oft would play ambitious freaks.The soul has no idea, itself, of such instinct;380   But seeks to muse upon its love for God, distinct.Existence is the secret of their constant war;The form in which ’tis waged thou’rt now about to hear.Had psychic indication proved sufficient sign,Material creation ‘d been a useless coin. 
Is love for God thy thought, aim, wish, design, intent?To forms of worship, fasting, thou wilt yield assent.The gifts and little presents interchanged by friends,Are not their love’s pure essence. Signs they are, not ends.Mere outward witnesses, that simply testifyTh’ affection’s feelings. These the heart, ’tis, sanctify.   385For all men know that kindnesses bestowed by handAre proofs of sympathy. Mind can this comprehend. 
A witness may speak falsely; also, may speak truth;Is sometimes drunk, with wine; sometimes, is urged by ruth.When wine is drunk, intoxications supervene;Its vapours rise into the head, erst so serene.Behold yon hypocrite! He fasts; he worships, prays;That he a man of God may seem. He’s not. Mere ways! 
Results of outward actions are of outward kind, — The signs of what is inward, working on the mind.   390Grant unto us, O Lord, discernment to perceiveWhat sign is true, which meant fond mortals to deceive!Suppose not that the senses with discernment plod;Discernment is the inner, gracious gift of God!Effect not being visible, we look to cause.We know that kindred moves to friendship, by fixed laws.But him, who judges by the light of God’s own truth,Effect and cause no longer hold a slave, forsooth.When love for God is lighted in the human heart,It fiercely burns; it suffers not effect’s dull smart.   395No sign of love does it require to seek for, there;For love is love’s own sign, giv’n from the highest sphere. 
Details there are, far more, to make this theme complete.If wished for, each can find them. They’re not obsolete.Sense must be gathered from material, outward form;Some sense is patent; some is hard to find, difform. 
The indication’s feeble; — tree and water see; — How different, apparently, their natures be! 
Let’s leave now all these words, — cause, nature, sign; — 400   And turn we to our Arab and his wife benign. 
The husband said: “I’ve now abandoned all dispute.All rule is in thy hands; thy power is absolute.Whatever thou ordain, submissive thou’lt me find;Its good or bad results shall not weigh on my mind.I’m non-existent; save, that by thee I must move;A lover; therefore am I deaf and blind, through love.” 
His wife him answered: “Is this all in kindness meant?Or dost thou seek by craft my plans to circumvent?”He swore: “By God; who knows the secrets of each heart;405   Who hath created Adam free from treacherous art;Who, in three cubits’ stature unto him dispensed,The mysteries of all decrees, all souls, condensed:Whatever is to be, to all eternity,To Adam taught, with every name of Deity,So that the very angels wearied under him,As he them taught, but ever gained by each maxim!” 
The revelations Adam made to them were vast;Had never been disclosed before, from first to last.The compass, spacious, of his all-inclosing mind410   Far wider was than heaven of heavens a grasp could find. 
The Prophet hath declared God made him clearly know:“I’m not contained, not held; by aught above, below,On earth, in heaven, above the heavens, I am not held.This know, then, thou also, My friend, as though beheld.But, wonderful! Believer’s heart can Me contain!If Me thou’dst seek, there look for Me, with might and main!” 
His words were: “Seek within My servants. There thou’lt meetThe paradise of My aspect. Thou most discreet!” The heaven of heavens, with all its wondrous wide extent,At sight of Adam’s glory into tremors went.   415The marvellous expanse of heaven’s a stretch extreme.But what is matter, all, when spirit is the theme! 
Each angel made remark: “Until this very hourI had a certain knowledge of the wide earth’s bower.Much duty I’ve performed upon its soil, down there.Surprise I’ve felt, not small, attachment so to bear.For what was my attachment to that ball of clay; — I, that am moulded from the glorious light of day?What was my strong affection? I’m light; darkness, earth!Can light and darkness mingle; — live in jocund mirth?   420O Adam! Now it’s clear! My love was mere instinct;In that the earth material gave for thee, succinct!Thy earthly body here was wove out of its clay;Thy spirit, pure, created was beyond the realm of day!The honour which we, spirits, have received through thee,Before all worlds had sparkled, by divine decree!When we were on the earth, we inattentive were;And little reeked the treasure trusted to its care!When orders were received to quit the earth, and mount,We felt regret to change; knew not on what account.   425We thought of reasons for the shift, and question made:‘O Lord! Who then shall take our place when we’re thus bade?Wilt Thou exchange our praise and service here below,For mere lip-homage from a worm Thee will not know?’An answer from the Lord, benign, did we receive:What you allege is somewhat many might deceive.Each word upon your tongues is surely out of place,As lisping talk of son to sire, without preface. 
Your rash objections would deserve to be chastised,430   But that I have decreed that mercy’s higher prized.Behold, O angels! Since you’ve made confusion strange,In you henceforth I’ve placed a sense of doubt and change!Since you demur, and I refrain from chastisement,None can gainsay my mercy; none may raise comment.A hundred mothers, fathers, meet not My decree!Each soul that’s born a zero is compared to Me!Their love is but the froth; My love, the sea of love!Froth comes and goes; the ocean none remove.More I may say. For, in this earthly oyster-shell435   There’s naught but froth of froth, of froth of froth to tell!’” 
The Lord thus spake; — the Lord, that sea of purity! — He spake not by conjecture; — truth’s own entity!What I here state is said in love’s humility.The Lord is He to whom I fly, — sole Deity!If thou wouldst put to test what I have here set forth,First prove thy test. Make truly sure it’s trouble’s worth.Cloak not thy secret thoughts. So may my thoughts be known.Propose whate’er thou list; within my power, ’tis shown.Thy heart conceal not. I’ll lay bare my heart of hearts;440   Accept all, of acceptance worthy, thy mind starts.That I may do whatever lies within my power,Do thou observe my heart’s condition in its bower. 
The wife observed: “A very sun of good is risen;Through whom a gladsome world’s enlarged from want’s sad prison.Vicegerent of th’ All-Merciful, Caliph of God,Fair Bagdād’s city prides itself to kiss his rod.If unto him thou have recourse, a prince thou’lt be.Why, then, to misery cleave, such as we hourly see? 
Companionship with fortune’s minions brings good luck;Where’s an elixir like their power, my dearest duck?   445Ahmed’s esteem raised Abū-Bekr such a height;For once confirming Ahmed’s word, ‘Faithful’ he’s hight!” 
The man demurred: “How can I gain access at court?Without an introduction, how find sure passport?Connection we must seek; or else invent excuse.No artizan can work without his tools. The deuce!Thus Mejnūn, when he’d heard by chance from passing wight,His Laylā was an invalid (which caused him fright),Exclaimed: Alas! Without excuse I cannot go!And if I visit not the sick one, I’m all woe!   450Would that I were physician, with his healing art;Then could I see my Laylā; none would dare me thwart!’And now he cries: ‘I have it! I’ve a right to go!No bashfulness shall keep me from her portico!’Had bats but eyes, with which to see and find their way,They’d fly about, disport themselves, jocund, by day.” 
The wife replied: “The Caliph’s public pageant isFor all who introduction lack; their griefs are his.To be, and have a grief, is introduction sure.Thus poverty and lowliness work their own cure.”   455 
He still objected: “Shall I fall in love with want,That I may urge my need as matter for some grant?E’en then, a witness credible I should requireT’ attest my indigence, when almoners inquire.Point out for me a witness; not mere words and wiles;That so the sovereign’s favour may be won, and smiles.For, otherwise, a mere pretext, without a proof,In justice’ court would fail, and bring reproof.A witness credible is, then, sine quā non.For suitor’s plea to stand, proof it must rest upon.”   460 
His wife rejoined: “The witness thou requir’st to bring,Must, by some shrewd contrivance, from thy prospects spring.Rain-water’s all we have in store within our hut,Estate, possessions, wealth, lie in our water-butt.A little pot of water shalt thou bear with thee,As offering to the Caliph. This present from me;And say: ‘No other wealth on earth do I possess.To Arabs of the desert, water’s happiness!The Caliph’s treasury is full of gems and gold;465   A pot of water such as this, its coffers do not hold!What is this pot? It is an emblem of our lives!The water in it, matchless virtue of our wives!Accept, then, gracious prince, this little pot from me;And out of all God’s gifts repay its value, free!’That pot’s five lips are emblems of our senses. Sure!Keep them all clean; so may thy honour, too, be pure!The pot will then relation keep with ocean’s wave;And I, perchance, advantage from that ocean have.If clean thou carry it before the sovereign’s eyes,470   He may be pleased therewith; — buy it from mere surprise.The pot will, then, of water never lacking be;My little water-pot shall suffice thee and me.Close tight its lips, and bear it full from our supply.A holy text ’tis says: ‘From lust close every eye.’ His beard, his moustache, both, will swell with joy at this.For prince supreme like him, my offering’s not amiss.”Thou, woman, didst not know that there, in Bagdād’s midst,A Tigris flowed with water, sweet as honey. — Didst?A very ocean is it, rapid in its course;475   With boats and ships, with fishers’ hooks, both fine and coarse. 
Go then, good man! The Caliph thee his state shall show!Thou’lt comprehend the text: “Beneath which rivers flow.” Thus, likewise, are our intellects, our thoughts, our sense;A drop compared with God’s boundless omniscience! 
The husband now chimed in: “Yes! Plug the pot’s mouth tight.Thou’st hit the very offering; — useful, good, and right!Sew it up carefully in case of felt, threefold.Our Caliph’s breakfast-water shall it be; — so cold!No other water’s like it in this world of ours; — It’s heaven’s pure ambrosia, ‘still’d from vernal showers!   480Poor tits know none but waters hard and bitter all; — Whence various maladies, with blindness, them befall!” 
The bird that lives where salt-marsh noisome airs exhales,Knows naught of joys pure water gives, and spicy gales!So thou, good man, who dwelledst ‘midst the desert’s waste,Hadst never seen a Tigris, known Euphrates’ taste!As he, again, not yet from worldly cares set free,Is ignorant of ecstasy, of rapture’s glee;Or, having heard thereof as tales from men of old,Knows them as names alone, in storybooks oft told;   485Child’s A, B, C; as taught to every lisping elf;But whose real meaning’s hidden from the teacher’s self. 
Our Arab man now takes that water-pot in charge.By day and night he travels; — load not over large!Anxiety fast holds him, lest the pot should break;Most watchfully he guards it from misfortune’s freak. 
His wife spends all her days in prayers on his behalf;Her worship o’er, she adds: “Lord! shield my better half!Secure our pot of water from all thievish hands!490   Send it may prove a pearl in sea of Bagdād’s lands!My husband, true, is shrewd; and know’s what he’s about;But pearls have enemies, we trow, in every rout!What is a pearl? A drop from fount of life sent down; A drop from non-existence, — whence all substance known!” 
Those prayers’ reward, — as guerdon of her sighs and tears; — His care’s requital, watchfulness, and constant fears; — Their pot reached Bagdād safe from robbers’ grip;Secure from shock of stone, from chance of fall or slip.A city, there, he sees, with every blessing filled;495   Where craving mortals ply each art, as they are skilled.Each moment, here or there, some extra-lucky wight,His object gains, receives from court what glads his sight!To Muslims, Unbelievers, equal grace is doled,Like rain and sunshine. Not so paradise, we’re told!One set of men he sees arrayed in honour’s robes;Another set endure, through hope and fear, sharp probes.As gentle, or as simple, prince or worm, pismire,All are alive, as though last trump’s notes them inspire!The worldly, in apparel sumptuous to behold;500   The godly, all immersed in transports clearly told!The hopeless have become as though their hopes were fair;The hopeful show enjoyment of fruition’s share! 
A voice proclaimed: “Come forward, all ye sons of want!”Beneficence seeks beggars, as for gifts they pant. 
Beneficence hunts up for beggars and for need,As beauty seeks her mirror, with a special greed.A pretty face is charming in its mirror seen;Beneficence gleams lovely through want’s chilly sheen.God hath enjoined in holy writ: “By forenoon’s glare!” “Muhammed, chide not thou too much at beggar’s prayer!”   505 
A beggar is a mirror wherein bounty shines.Dull not that mirror, then, with breath of anger’s whines!The beggar ’tis shows forth what charity achieves;A charitable man for this those wants relieves.A beggar, then, ‘s a mirror of th’ Almighty’s grace;And whoso’s with the Lord, therein sees his Lord’s face. 
He that hath love for other than the Lord of all,Is dead at heart, — not living; — shadow on a wall!Whoe’er adopts God’s poverty, without false show,Secures the prize of God’s rich pleasure here below!   510Who puts on sham of poverty deserves no bread.(Bones are not given to effigies of dogs. They’re dead!)His want craves pelf; ’tis not the love of God he’d seek.Lay not thy bounty at the feet of one too sleek. 
A landshark is a mendicant for mere pelf’s sake.He’s fish in form; but will not to the water take.Domestic fowl is he; not eagle of free air.With Lot he sips of wine; God’s water’s his despair.He loves his God, if but his God will grant him wealth;But nothing cares for God’s mere grace,; — for spirit’s health.   515Should he conceive th’ idea of love for God alone,God’s essence he’d deny, God’s attributes disown.Man’s fancy is a creature; — born with mortal lot.God was not born. His scripture says: “Nor was begot.” 
The man in love with self, and with his fancy’s freak,Can never be a lover who to God will seek.Were fancy’s lover true, and free from crafty guile,His fancy’s tropes had led him to the truth erewhile. 
That dictum would require a commentary, full,520   But fear withholds me. Prejudice will have its pull!Old prejudice, quite purblind to the truth, I see,A hundred phantoms conjures up to frighten me.Not every man has heard aright the still small voice;Not every bird’s a fig-pecker, that sweets rejoice;How then a bird that’s dead, — turned putrid long ago; — A man of prejudice, all sightless, eyeless, so!A painted fish cares not for water, or for land.Soap to a blackamoor is one, or tar, in hand. 
Shouldst thou depict a portrait overwhelmed with grief,525   Would grief or joy be felt, though shown in strong relief?The picture would look sorrowful; — no sorrow feel;Or smiling happiness; — without gay laughter’s peal.The joy or grief depicted by a pencil’s art,Is naught but simulated; — knows nor thrill, nor smart. 
Lugubrious countenances are for our behoof;That we may be reminded not to court reproof.And beaming visages are not without their use,If they recall us from mere form to sense occluse.The various effigies we see in this bath-house, 530   Disguised in draperies, are dolls; — blind fools to chouse.So long as thou’rt outside, naught else but clothes thou’lt see.Undress thyself. Come in; and see the nude, the free.There’s no admission granted to a bath, while dressed.But clothes, the body, this, the soul, leave all unguessed. 
Our Arab man, from far in desert’s sandy waste,Has reached at length the walls of Bagdād, home of taste.The guards, the officers, on duty at the gate,Received him with politeness, kindness delicate.Without a question asked, his case they’d understood.Their charge was to show kindness first, ere asked for food.   535So they addressed him thus: “Ho, thou, good Arab prince!Whence comest thou? How fares it? Straight thy wish evince!” 
He answered: “Prince I am, if you to me be kind;But if you me contemn, I’m naught in my own mind.Your aspects indicate you’re men of wealth and rank;Your speech and smiles betoken breeding, noble, frank.Mere sight of your kind features salve is to the eyes;Your looks alone enrich; — gold in your voices lies.Each one of you expression is of God’s own grace;In Caliph’s bosom nurtured, favoured with high place;   540That you, in turn, dispense th’ elixir of support,And brighten longing eyes by words of kind import.I am a stranger, poor, come from the desert’s sands,In hopes some favour to obtain from sovereign hands.The rumour of his goodness fills the wilderness;Each atom in its wastes blooms thence in joyfulness.In search of wealth have I approached his capital;Now I’m arrived, I burn with pleasures optical.E’en as the lass in search of bread at baker’s shop,Struck with his ‘prentice’ beauty, swooned; — a lifeless drop!   545Or like the saunterer for air in royal park,Who lost his heart to one he met, gay as a lark!Or like the desert merchant drawing from a wellWhat he thought water, was entranced by Joseph’s spell!Again, as Moses hasted for a coal of fire,And found the burning bush, that led him to empire 
Or Jesus, who escaped his foes with one fleet bound,And found himself then landed where the sun goes round! An ear of corn it was that baited Adam’s trap. 550   Bat thence himself became the source of mankind’s sap!The falcon stoops to earth enticed by luring fate;He there meets man’s good teaching, soars to princely state.A child is sent to school to teach him learning’s prize,In hope of toys and treats he studies till he’s wise.On leaving school he sits in seat of law or power;He paid his schoolpence then; — he’s now lord of the hour!So Abbās sallied forth to war, with fierce intent,To put Muhammed down, — Islam to circumvent.Defender of the Faith, till death, he then became;555   The Caliphate was destined, in his line, to fame!So am I come, in hopes at this court to advance;Though at its gate as yet, I feel I’ve every chance.In quest of bread am I; as offering, water bring.The hope of bread sets wide heaven’s portals at one swing.’Twas bread that drove out Adam from his paradise;’Tis bread will gain me entrance where my hopes take rise.From bread, from water, both, as angels, far I stroll;And, following the spheres, around this centre roll!Without an object none will toil on earth, you see,560   Save true and godly lovers. They’re from motives free!” 
Th’ Infinite’s lovers finite’s worshippers are not.Who seek the finite lose th’ Infinite, as we wot.When finite with the finite falls in love, perforce,His loved one soon returns to her infinite source. 
A beard that puts itself into another’s grasp,In lather’s smothered; emblem of a weak mind’s gasp.He’s not his own lord; cannot guide his own affairs;He does but what he’s told; where’er he’s bid, repairs. 
Would’st sin with woman? Choose, at least, one that is free.Would’st rob and steal? Let pearls and jewels be thy fee.   565A slave obeys a master; has himself no will;The scent is all the rose’s; thorns show no such skill.A slave may not attain to wish that he may form;His toil is vain, his trouble profitless; — poor worm!Shall hunter snare a shadow? Where were then his food?A shadow’s not a substance; — can do no one good.A foolish hunter seized the shadow of a bird!The fowl, on tree securely perched, not one foot stirred;But, wondering, thought: “What is the stupid fool about?Demented, sure; his little wit he’s let ooze out!”   570 
But if thou thinkest finite’s of th’ Infinite born;And sayest: “For love of rose, do honour to the thorn;”Consider: finite unto Infinite’s not joined.Or what need of the prophets? They’ve not scripture coined.The prophets have been sent to link the two in one.If they’re not two, but one, what have the prophets done?But let that be. Th’ inquiry has no useful end.The day is waning; let us to our tale attend. 
The Arab now his little pot of water showed.As seed to earth, he it on Caliph’s court bestowed;   575And said: “Present my offering at the sovereign’s feet,If beggar save his king from want, it’s surely meet.The water’s fresh; the little jar green-glazed and new;Filled from a pool replenished by the rain and dew.” 
On hearing this the guards were laughing in their sleeves;But still, as precious, took the jar; — polite court-reeves!The Caliph’s kindly nature, active, well-informed,To kindness had each member of his court reformed.For as the sovereign is, so will his subjects be.580   The azure vault of heaven makes green the earth; — you see. 
A king’s a reservoir; his servants are his mains,Through whom his bounty flows, to swell his subjects’ veins.The stream, if flowing from a tank all sweet and pure,Each main distributes bounty, courtesy; — be sure.But should the reservoir prove foul and nauseous, then,The mains can flow with naught but venom, like a fen.The mains can only what they get convey around.Remember this. We’re treading now on solid ground. 
A sovereign’s goodness is an unembodied soul,585   That permeates the clay of human frame, its goal.It is the mind, the all-informing, well-derived,That brings the body into discipline, where hived.Love is a wanton, restless, reckless of control,That drives the man to madness; passion does extol;But goodness is a stream as sweet as Fount of Life;Its pebbles are all pearls, all jewels, beauteous, rife. 
Whichever be the science makes a teacher famed,His scholars’ minds with that will surely be inflamed.A jurist’s pupils study principles of law,590   If but their mental principles be free from flaw.A lawyer’s prentice over subtle cases pores;The principles, with him, are most unwelcome bores.A syntax-teacher rears a host of grammar’s sons,With whom his syntax passes for the sun of suns. 
A teacher who inculcates abnegation’s creed,Surrounds himself with pupils free from lust and greed.But at the hour of death, of science’s long roll,The art of poverty’s what most behoves man’s soul. 
A syntax-teacher, once, was mounted in a boat,Who to the skipper turned, as soon as e’er afloat,   595And asked: “Hast studied syntax?” “No indeed,” quoth he.The teacher then: “Thy life’s half-wasted? Dost thou see?”The skipper felt heart-broken at this pert remark;But, for the moment, held his peace; — wise man’s bulwark.The wind arose; the bark was sorely tempest-tossed;The skipper then addressed the teacher, sickness-crossed:“Knowest thou the swimmer’s art, good friend? With speed reply.”“Nay,” said the teacher, “that’s an art the schools decry.”The skipper now remarked: “Thy whole life’s gone to waste.The ship must go to pieces. Water salt thou’lt taste.   600With syncope, not syntax, now we’ll have to deal.With syncope, from water comes nor hurt, nor weal,The sea bears on its surface bodies of the dead;But living men it drowns; them sinks, as though of lead.So soon as thou’lt be dead to every human artTo thee eternity its secrets will impart.Thou hitherto hast deemed us mortals asses all;Now thou thyself, as ass on ice, must have a fall.Although thou be the very Plato of the age,Thou’st still to learn that time, the world, is but a page.”   605 
This tale about the syntax-teacher we’ve tacked on,To show the grammar dissolution turns upon.All syntax, grammar, jurisprudence, law, and art,Thou’lt find, my friend, of knowledge is but a small part. 
Our little learning is the Arab’s water-pot.In Caliph, of God’s wisdom we’ve an emblem got.We bring our pot of water to great Tigris’ stream.If we ourselves not asses call, us asses deem.The Arab of our tale excusable was, — troth;610   He knew not of a Tigris. Where’s the Arab doth?Had he, as we, known Tigris’ stream, and all its store,His water-pot had never travelled to its shore;Had he become aware of what a Tigris meant,Arrived at Bagdād, he’d his pot to fragments sent. 
The Caliph, when he saw that pot, and heard that tale,The vase had filled with golden sequins, like a bale,Our Arab thus to free from poverty’s rude grasp; — A robe of honour, too; and presents for his clasp,He ordered. Then the whole unto the guards were sent,615   With kindliest injunctions, fruit of good intent:“That all unto that Arab man be safely given,Whose journey home by Tigris’ arrowy stream be driven.By land he came; he’d travelled all the way on foot;But Tigris’ stream may bear him back a shorter route.” 
Our Arab in a boat was placed at river’s side;The stream he saw, admired, bowed low, lost all his pride;Exclaiming: “Wondrous goodness of the sovereign will!Th’ acceptance of my water-pot more wondrous still!How could that sea of wealth my drop deign to accept,620   And largely thus to recompense the trifle kept?” 
Know now, my friend, this world ‘s one mighty water-pot,With wisdom and with beauty teeming; as all wot.One drop, however, ’tis, from ocean of His grace,Whose fulness cannot be confined in any place.That treasure latent was. Through fulness it burst forth,More glorious than the heavens became thenceforth the earth. 
The latent treasure, pouring out its riches great,The earth made kinglike, clothed with more than regal state.One little branch canal from th’ ocean of God’s grace,Thus overwhelms this mighty water-pot of space.   625 
They who see God are ever rapt in ecstasy;And raptured, hold that water-pot mere fallacy.O thou! envy of whom is to that pot a stone!Though fractured by the shock, the pot yields sounder tone.The pot is cracked; but, still, its water is not spilt;The crack’s the very source through which it’s sounder built.The jar’s each single particle’s in dance and revery,Though unto man’s poor wisdom this seems foolery.The pot, the world, all it contains, are lost to view.Consider well this fact! God knows it’s simply true.   630 
If thou canst grasp this meaning, thou’rt like falcon strong.Beat, then, the pinions of thy thoughts. Be hawk, ere long.Thought’s pinions are bemired in thee, and heavy move;Because thou feedest on clay; clay’s bread to thee, I’ll prove.As flesh, bread is but clay. Trust not thereon for strength;Or thou’lt remain, claylike, within the earth at length. 
Dost hunger? What art thou, then, but a dog?Fierce, ill-affected, raging; lusts thy vitals clog!And when with food thou’rt filled, polluted straight becomest.Thou losest strength and sense; mere stock, thou sleep welcomest. 635 So, being doglike or a stock, senseless, impure,How canst thou progress make in path of virtue, sure? 
Whatever ’tis thou huntest, dog thou art, in sooth.Feed not, then, thus, the dog of lust’s voracious tooth.When dogs are satisfied, obedience they forswear;To follow up the game they one and all forbear. 
His want it was disposed the Arab of our tale,To travel till he’d reached the Caliph’s courtly vale.We’ve shown the bounty of that sovereign merciful,640   Shed on the Arab’s wretchedness, most plentiful. 
Whate’er a lover says, the sentiment of loveShines through his words, if but thoughts towards his mistress rove.Discourses he on law, love furnishes the theme;Throughout his labouring periods, love’s the enthymeme.Should blasphemy rise to his lips, of faith it smacks.Doubt, when by him expressed, shows confidence’s knacks.The spume that rises from the sea of his pure heartPartakes the nature of its source, truth’s counterpart.We must esteem such spume as foam of mountain-rill; — 645   Upbraiding from a lip beloved is worshipped still.Attention we pay not to harsh words issuing thence,; — The features we adore divest them of offence.However strange such utterances, they all seem true;The stranger they appear, to sense they lend more cue. 
If sugar we should cast in mould to look like bread,Then eat it, we the sugar taste. Form’s of no stead.Should true believer golden idol light upon,Will he for worship set it up, anon, anon?Nay! To the fire he’ll quickly it in wrath cosign,650   And strip it of the form that makes it sin’s foul sign.The gold, abstracted from the idol’s form, is pure.That form it is corrupts, — can men to sin allure.The gold’s an essence fixed, produced by nature’s God;The idol stamp is transitory; — soon downtrod. 
Thou for one flea to flames thy bed wouldst never give;For one musquito’s hum, not wish to cease to live.If form-entrapped thou be, idolater thou art!Eschew mere form; attend to essence, as thy part.Art bound on pilgrimage? Seek other pilgrims out; — Be they from Hind, from Tatary, or Hadramout.   655Peer not into their features; look not at their skins.Inquire their thoughts, their hearts; — if these be free of sins.A negro findest thou one with thee in faith and creed?Him deem a white; — thy brother is he in thy need. 
Our tale is told. Its ups and downs are manifold.Like lovers’ thoughts, it’s wandering, unconnected, bold.Commencement it has none; — eternity’s its sign; — Still less conclusion; — so, eternity’s design.Or, rather, it’s like water; — every drop, so rich,Commencement is, and end; — yet shows not which is which.   660 
But, God forbid! Our story’s not a fable. See!Its narrative’s a point concerns both me and thee!A gnostic, in possession of his wits and sense,Repeats not what is past; — he bides the present tense. 
The Arab, his poor pitcher, Caliph, all, observe,Ourselves are. “He shall swerve whom God shall cause to swerve!” Our Arab, know, ‘s the mind; his wife, our lusts and greed.These two are tenebrous; the mind’s the torch they need.Now hear whence has arisen the ground of their dispute:Th’ infinite finites holds, of various attribute; — 665Parts finite; — not parts infinite of th’ infinite,Like scent of rose, — part infinite of definite. 
The verdure’s beauty infinite is, as a part;The cooing of the dove’s as infinite, in logic art.But go we not too far afield for sorts and kinds;Or poor disciples ne’er will slake their thirsting minds. 
Dost doubt? Art racked with difficulties? To excess?Have patience. “Patience is the key of all success!” Be abstinent. Let not thy crowding thoughts run wild.670   Thoughts lions are, and antelopes. Mind’s forest; child! 
The prime of remedies is abstinence, we know.And scratching irritates the itch; — as leeches show.Of treatment medical the base is abstinence.Therefore be abstinent. Show strength of mind and sense.Accept my counsel. Lend an ear as I advise;In golden earrings, counsel’s pearls shall be thy prize.Be thou as slave to this, my cunning goldRumi-art;I’ll teach thee how to soar beyond the stars’ bright chart.Know, first of all, creation’s minds are manifold,675   As are its forms; — from Alpha to Omega told.From this variety, disorder seems to rise;Though, in true sense, to unity the series hies.In one sense, they’re discordant; other, in accord;They now as folly, now as wisdom, pass a word.The day of judgment will to each assign its place;All men of wisdom yearn to see that day of grace. 
He who, as blackamoor, is steeped in sin’s dark dye,In that dread day shall gulp dishonour’s foulest lye.The wretch whose countenance beams not bright as the sun,680   Shall strive in vain behind the densest veil to run. 
If, like some thorns, his stem display no single rose,That springtide will prove fatal to his safe repose.But he that blooms from head to foot with righteous deeds,With joy shall welcome spring’s awakening of those meads. 
The useless thorn desires the nipping wintry blast,To lay all low and simplify the flowery vast;That so, all beauty cloaked, all squalor hid, the same,All glorious hues, all hideous sights, be rendered tame.The leaf’s fall to such thorn more grateful is than spring;The ruby and the flint are one in tithesman’s ring.   685True, that the gardener’s eye in winter knows the thorn;But what is one eye’s scrutiny to general scorn! 
The vulgar public is, as ‘twere, one witless wight;Each star’s a clipping of the moon, in its fond sight.Not so great men of wisdom, radiant with troth,They shout with joy: “Good tidings! Spring breaks into growth!” 
Unless the flowers blossom on the fertile trees,How can the fruit be gathered, honey store the bees?The flowers blow and fade; the fruit begins to swell.So, when our bodies die, our souls in glory dwell.   690The fruit’s reality; the flower is but a sign;The flower’s the harbinger; the fruit, the true design.The flower blown and past, the fruit then comes in sight;The first must perish ere the other can see light.Unless a loaf be broke, no nutriment it yields;Until the grapes are crushed, no cup of wine man wields.So drugs, to prove a solace to the sufferer’s ache,Together must be blended, rolled in one smooth cake. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





X. Patience and Perseverance Under a Teacher 
Husāmu-’d-Dīn, Light of the Truth, take up, my friend,A sheet, that thou a Teacher’s virtues mayst append.True, thou’rt not strong; thy frame is delicate, at best;But thou’rt the sun that lights my thoughts to their safe nest.Thou art both lamp and lantern, all in one. Dost see?Guide to my heart’s behests, clue to my wish thou’rt he.Their thread is in thy hand; thy guidance can it shift;The pearls upon it strung are gems, thy soul’s free gift. 
Write down the qualities by which a Teacher’s known.5   Select thy Teacher first; then, follow all he’s shown.A Teacher’s summer’s glow; cold winter, crowd terrene;The rabble’s darkness self; the Teacher, moon serene. 
Young Fortune have I named my Teacher, for the nonce; — Young Fortune, truth’s real Teacher; vigorous at once.An ancient Teacher he; commencement he ne’er had;A solitary pearl; — all peerless, never sad.Increase of age gives wine fresh strength, as well is known;Especially truth’s wine, that flows from God’s high throne.Select a Teacher, then. Without such, travel’s vain;10   The way is dangerous, — beset with evil’s train. 
By well-known road, though travelled many times before,Without a guide to venture, opens peril’s door.How then an unknown path thou ne’er hast followed yet?Go not alone, without a guide; — act not in fret.Unless thy Teacher be at hand to lead thee right,The clamours of the demons surely thee’ll affright.Those demons will mislead thee, into danger cast;More clever ones than thou have lost their wits at last. 
Learn from the Prophet’s words the error of their ways;How Satan led them far astray in bygone days.   15From off the track to all that’s good he them misled;Them carried off; them rendered blind, by vain thoughts fed.Behold their bones, their skeletons, along the road!Take warning thence. Drive not thy beast with maddening goad!Dismount; and to the rightful path safe lead him back,Where guides abound, — experienced travellers dot the track.Leave not thy beast; his rein loose not thou from thy hand.His inclination is to wander o’er the land.One moment only leave him carelessly to roam;Towards the pastures he at once will rush, all foam.   20Thy beast is not a friend to travelling by the road.How many muleteers through this have lost a load!Know’st not the way? Observe which path thy beast would take,And follow the reverse. Secure this will thee make.“Consult thou them;” but then, do not what they advise;For he who them opposes not, to ruin hies.Lend not thyself to lust and fancy’s every wind;For these are what lead men astray; to God’s truth blind. 
There’s nothing in the world that better curbs the lusts,25   Than holy company. Protected, he who trusts. 
The Prophet said to ‘Alī: “Cousin, list to me.The ‘Lion of the Truth’ art thou; a hero. See!Trust not too much, however, to thy courage, sole;Confide, much rather, on God’s aim to keep thee whole.Put faith in aid from His divine, omniscient mind,That never can be baffled by disputant blind.His shadow on the earth is what keeps it in place;His spirit, sunbird-like, soars in supernal space.Were I to speak His praises until judgment day,30   No end, no interruption, would admit my say.Himself He’s veiled in man, as sun behind a cloud.This seek to comprehend. God knows what mysteries shroud.The sun He is; — the sun of spirit, not of sky;By light from Him man lives; — and angels eke, forby.Then, ‘Ali, of all service man can offer here,Do thou choose trust in God, dependence firm, sincere.Each man betakes himself some special worship to;And each some special friend selects, without ado.Do thou take refuge in God’s wisdom, full, divine;35   He’ll foil the secret foe that would thee undermine.Of all the modes of worship, this choose thou, the best;Thou’lt distance all competitors, the prize thou’lt wrest.Thy Teacher having chosen thus, obedience yield,Implicit; even as Moses journeying o’er that field. Whate’er events betide, beware, and question not;For fear thy guide should turn, and drive thee from the spot. Should He destroy a ship, — no murmur from thy mouth;Should He an infant choke, — let slip no word uncouth. 
God hath declared his hand is like the hand of God,By saying: “God’s right hand above all hands doth plod.’   40God’s hand it is that kills him; makes him living, too.But what is living? The everlasting spirit. Lo!Whoever journeys, now and then, this road alone,The prayers of saints it is leads him to safety’s zone.A saint’s protection is not less than angel’s aid;His help is God’s right hand, when all is truly said.Now, if an absent saint have such portentous power,A present Teacher’s honour sure must higher tower.If for the absent tempting viands are prepared,For present guests what may not largely be outshared?   45The varlet who to serve his lord is present there,Must rank before the absentee, for goodly fare.Thus, having Teacher chosen, be not too thin-skinned,Nor wishy-washy, to a muddy puddle kinned.For every buffet, see thou do not umbrage take:How can a mirror polished be, unless it bear a shake?” 
Hear now this pregnant tale narrators have preserved;A practice it relates in Qazwīn much observed:Upon the breast, the arms, the bladebones, and the like,With needle’s point and indigo, tattooed designs they strike.   50 
A certain Qazwīn bully to an artist hied,To have a brave design imprinted on his hide.The artist first inquired what pattern he’d select.The man a lion rampant thought he must elect;And said: “My luck resides in Leo, — lion-sign;Depict thou then a lion, deep-blue stained, benign.”The artist then demanded where he’d wish it done;Our man replied: “Between my bladebones it enthrone.” 
The artist then began to ply his needles’ train;The Qazwīn bully bellowed, smarting with the pain.   55 
The artist he addressed: “Most clever man of skill,Thou’lt drive me mad. What picture works me so much ill?”Said he: “A lion’s form is what thou didst enjoin.”“O yes!” replied the bully. “What part dost thou coin?”The artist: “At the tail have I commenced this time.”Our man: “O never mind the tail, designer prime!Your lion’s tail has whacked me on my rump so hard,That I’ve no power to breathe, nor such pain disregard.Allow thy lion to remain without a tail;60   Thy needles have unnerved me with their sharp assail.” 
The artist then began upon another part,And worked his instruments. They soon induced new smart.The patient screamed again: “What member limnest thou now?”Our artist answered: “’Tis the lion’s ear, I trow.”His man replied: “O leave him without ears this time;An earless lion’s not so bad. Cut short the rhyme.” 
Anew the artist on a part assayed his hand.Afresh the bully interfered, by pain unmanned.“What part art now at work on? Say, my worthy friend!”65   “O,” said the artist, “now his body I append.”“Leave out his body!” gasped the suffering Qazwīn man;“The pain’s unbearable. Make short work, as thou can.” 
The artist now quite lost his wits, as well he might;He scratched his head; sought how to mend his plight;Dashed all his needles, indigo, design, to earth;In anger saying: “What the plague’s come now to birth?A lion tailless, headless, bodiless, who’s seen?God such a lion ne’er created, sure, I ween!” 
Have patience, thou too, brother, with thy needle’s smart.So shalt thou ‘scape the sting of conscience in thy heart.   70They who have conquered, — freed themselves from body’s thrall,Are worshipped in the spheres, the sun, the moon, stars, all.Whoever’s killed pride’s demon in his earthly frame,The sun and clouds are slaves, to do his bidding, tame.His heart can lessons give of flaming to the lamp;The very sun not equals him in ardent vamp.For God hath said, in speaking of the scorching sun,These words: “It swerved from them.” It had new course to run. 
The sharpest thorns are welcome, as the roseleaf soft,To finite who to th’ Infinite can soar aloft.   75What signifies to glorify the Lord of heaven;To humble self to dust; with meekness, pride to leaven?What use to learn to formulate God’s unity;What use to bow one’s self before. the Deity?Wouldst shine as brilliantly in sight of all?Annihilate thy darksome self, thy being’s pall.Let thy existence in God’s essence be enrolled,As copper in alchemist’s bath is turned to gold.Quit “I” and “We,” which o’er thy heart exert control.’Tis egotism, estranged from God, that clogs thy soul. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XI. The Lion’s Hunt, in Company 
A lion, wolf, and fox together went to hunt;Among the hills, in quest of game, they turned their brunt.By mutual help and aid, they hoped to make the fieldToo hot for other animals not under union’s shield.Co-operating with each other, they surmised,A heavy bag they each would make of what each prized. 
’Tis true, the noble lion felt of this ashamed.Still, he politely showed towards them his spirit tamed.A king feels inconvenienced by throngs of troops;5   But out of kindness makes them share his warlike swoopsThe sun would feel ashamed, did stars with him appear;’Tis generous in the sun to grace the starry sphere.’Twas God’s command to Ahmed still: “With them consult.” True, they gave no advice; no counsel did result.Upon the balance barley’s weighed, as well as gold;But barley, thence, has not acquired gold’s value told.The spirit with the flesh is fellow-traveller now;A dog has sometimes charge of palace-yard below. 
The company, then, set out for the woods amain,10   As followers of the lion’s majesty, and train. 
A mountain-ox, an ibex, next a hare, they took;Since fortune smiled on them in each succeeding nook.A lion’s followers on the plain of strife and war,Of food, by day or night, shall know no want, no bar. 
Their prey they carried from the hills into the plain;Or dead, or sorely wounded; — bleeding, or clean slain.The wolf and fox were moved to pitch of keen desire,To see the prey shared out with justice by their sire.   15The shade of their cupidity caught Leo’s eye,He understood their confidence, their longing’s dye.Whoe’er has insight to the hearts and minds of men,Knows at a glance what’s passing under his sharp ken.Beware, O heart, thou ever-fond one, in his sight,Thy secret to betray, — thy wish to bring to light!He knows it all, though ignorance he may pretend; — His smile is but a veil thy aim to comprehend. 
The lion, having measured all their secret thought,Made no remark; he knew how they could both be bought;   20Within his breast revolved their fitting punishment:“I’ll show you, my fine fellows, what’s by lion meant.My pleasure’s, for you both, what you should seek to know;Not calculate beforehand what I may bestow.Your every thought should but reflect my sovereign will,And thankfully await what I may give you still.Have pictures aught to say to guide the artist’s hand?His cunning ’tis decides what portrait shall expand.So all your paltry surmise of my royal mindAn insult is, — an arrogance, — that must be fined.   25‘They who conceive an evil thing of God’ are cursed;And if I spare you, justice will be clean reversed.To rid the world of scandal, I must end your lives;Your story shall a moral point; whoe’er contrives.” 
With this he smiled again most grimly on the pair.Trust not a lion’s smile, all ye to live who care.The riches of the world are smiles of Providence;They make men proud, and lead them to their fate prepense.Through poverty and suffering we may escape30   The trap that riches bait; and so avoid the scrape. 
The lion now addressed the wolf: “Share out the spoil.Do justice to us all. Thou’rt versed in cunning’s foil.Be thou my factor. Carve the game as may be fit.So shalt thou honour win from all who see thy wit.”The wolf then: “Royal Sir, the mountain-ox is thine.Thou’rt great; the ox is large and fat; let none repine.The ibex is my share. As I, so it’s the mean.And thou, O fox, shalt have the hare. ’Tis not too lean.” 
The lion interposed: “Wolf! What is this thou’st said?35   I present; and to talk of ‘ thou ‘ and ‘I,’ so staid IWhat rubbish is a wolf, to deem himself a judgeIn presence of a lion, who’ll soon make him budge?Come hither, ass! Thyself alone it is thou’st sold!”With this he tears the wolf to pieces, all too bold. 
He saw the wolf had not one grain of common sense;So stripped him of his hide, his life, his brain so dense.Then said: “Since sight of me chased not all thought of selfFrom thee, death by my paw was due, thou wretched elf!Thyself thou shouldst have vanquished in my presence dread.40   Not having done so, thou’rt now numbered with the dead.” 
“All perisheth, except His counsel” ‘s holy writ. If we’re not of “His counsel,” life cannot us fit. 
He that will lose his life for God’s sake, hath it still;“All perisheth” hath then no power his soul to kill.He’s of th’ excepted; not of those to perish doomed.For, who’s excepted, saved is he. His spring hath bloomed.But he that, in God’s court, of “me” and “thee” shall prate,Will be cut off; — far banished from the heavenly gate. 
A man once came and gaily knocked at a friend’s door.The other asked: “Who’s there? Is this a threshing-floor?”   45“’Tis I,” said he. “O then thou straight mayest go away.’Tis dinner-time. Mature, not crude, must be who’d stay.Thou’rt thou? Most crude thou art; by rawness’ self estranged.By fire of trial those crude humours must be changed.’Tis fire matures the crude. Let absence be the fire,Shall purge thee of thyself, burn out all selfish mire.” 
Away he went in anguish; travelled a whole year;Saw not his friend; so pined with yearning, anxious fear;Matured his soul with suffering’s searching throes and pains.Then sought the door from whence he’d been repulsed, again.   50He knocked anew, — his heart with many fears oppressed,Lest from his lip some word unwelcome drop confessed. 
Within, the question’s heard: “Who knocks at my street door?”He answered: “Thy own second self; — though all too poor.”The invitation followed: “Let myself walk in.My cot’s too small for two selves to find room therein.The thread’s not double in a needle’s single eye.As thou’rt now single, enter. Room thou’lt find. Pray, try!” 
The thread and needle have relation, each to each;55   For needle’s eye a camel’s far beyond all reach.How shall a camel ever be so fine and slimUnless long fasting his redundant flesh should skim?The hand of God is wanted, then, to make it passThe God who by His word creates both man and grass.Impossibilities are possibles to Him;The stubbornest is docile when His will curbs whim.The blind from birth, the leper, e’en the dead, arise,Whole, sound, whene’er th’ Omnipotent “Come forth” but cries.E’en non-existence, death of death, at His command,60   Starts into life, compelled by His supreme demand. 
Recite, my friend: “Each day He’s busied with a work:” And know, He’s never idle, unemployed to lurk.His smallest daily toil, — a work like pleasure still, — Is to send forth three armies, bound to work His will.One, from the loins of spheres the elements to stir;So that all plants may vegetate, from moss to fir.One, from the wombs of mothers to earth’s surface prone,That male and female may increase, not lie like stone.The third hence wends its way to sepulchre’s dread bourn,65   There to receive, at length, reward; and joy, or mourn.Leave we this theme;— ’tis endless, — never would have done.Let’s see, now, how the friends enjoyed themselves alone. 
Our host invites his guest to enter, free from scorn:“Thou’rt welcome, self of mine! We’re not like rose and thorn.Our thread is single, — free from knots and tangle; done,As ‘Be,’ though duplex as to form, in sense is one.” 
That “Be” ‘s a rope, of power collective, to the endThat nullity may be united to a friend.Thus duplex means are wanted, for appearances;Though, in effect, one means there be of all that is.   70The biped, as the quadruped, goes but one road.The one-edged knife, the two-edged shears, make one inroad. 
Observe yon pair of bleachers at their daily toil.Apparently, they differ, combat, as they moil.The one’s for ever wetting cloths in their stream’s tide,The other dries them just as fast in hot noontide.The first, again to soak the scarce-dried cloths makes haste;As though in opposition to his partner’s waste.But, in reality, the two have but one aim:Co-operation’s what they jointly, both proclaim.   75 
Each prophet, every saint, has his especial rite;But, as all tend to God, they’re one, multipartite.Sleep overcomes alike the followers of all creeds;As water makes all mills to turn and grind, at needs.The water flows from upwards, down upon the mill;Its flowing through the trough is but man’s wants to fill.No sooner has man’s need been fully satisfied,He turns the water off; — straight in its bed it’s tied. 
To teach men wisdom, stream of speech flows through the mouth;But spirit hath another course, far less uncouth.   80Without a voice or repetition it rolls on,As through elysium, streams; — flowers springing aye, anon.O Lord! Do Thou vouchsafe to my weak, erring soulTo see the realm where, voiceless, spirit thoughts may stroll, 
That so my mind, in glee, on foot or head, may wingIts flight to the far bourn that parts from nothing, thing,Careering o’er the boundless fields of ecstasy,Where fancy joins reality in entity.Far-reaching more ‘s nonentity than fancy’s stretch;85   And thus, his fancy is a source of woe to wretch.Then, being’s narrower far than fancy’s power of wing;E’en as the full moon wanes, till it becomes a string.The world of matter and its forms is narrower still;A prison all too strait for mind to have its will.Plurality and composition are the cause;Our senses these alone can comprehend, and pause.Beyond our senses lies the world of unity.Desirest thou unity? Beyond thy senses fly!Divine command, “Be!” was one act; two-lettered word;90   Of grave import, though short, sprung from all being’s Lord.But leave we this, and turn to see how fares it now,With our acquaintances, wolf, fox, and lion; — trow. 
The lordly lion ‘d torn poor wolf’s head from his tail,That so two heads there might not be for one avail.“On them We vengeance took” ‘s a well-known sacred text;Wherefore, poor wolf, not quash thyself, when lion’s next? 
The lion turned, then, to the fox, and bade him shareThe prey they’d seized; that they might make a meal, not spare.The wily fox, low bowing with a reverence meet,95   Said: “Sire, the ox your share is, for your breakfast treat.The ibex, then, will suffice for your midday lunch,To serve as stop-gap in the interval of munch.The hare a light repast will furnish ere you sleep;The royal paunch from indigestion’s pains ‘twill keep.” 
The lion answered: “Well said, fox. Thou’rt justice’ self.Who taught thee with such judgment rare to portion pelf?Where didst thou learn to do full justice with great art?”Said he: “My Lord, to teach me was that dead wolf’s part.” 
The lion thus replied: “For us much love thou’st shown.Take thou all three unto thyself, as very own.   100Good fox! Thou’st given up thyself entire, for us.Why should I injure thee? Thou’rt I myself. No fuss!Myself am thine; the prey is thine; all, — every bit.Exalt thy head above the spheres. For that thou’rt fit.Thou’st taken warning from that wretched, selfish wolf.No longer fox art thou, my lion, my own self!A wise head ever lessons learns from others’ ills,Who sees his neighbours victims fall, knows what them kills.” 
The fox now thanked his stars a hundred, thousandfold,For that the lion first the wolf to share had told;   105And reasoned: “Had he given me first his high commandTo share the prey, my life I had not kept in hand.Then praise to Him who ‘th placed me low in this world’s scale,To follow after mightier ones when they regale.” 
So have we heard God’s judgments wrought in ages pastOn people of the eld; — set forth as mountains fast,That we may learn from them, — the wolves of early days.Then let us, as the fox, glean wisdom from those lays.“God’s people sanctified” ‘s the title on us cast,By God’s own Prophet, truthful witness, and the last.   110The bones, the skeletons of all those old-world wolves,Consider well, ye readers; — think upon yourselves. 
Who’s wise will from his heart cast out all fond conceitsOf greatness, when he hears of ‘Ād’s and Pharaoh’s feats.Unless he warning take from what on others fell,Men shall a moral draw from his case, sad to tell. 
Cried Noah: “Ye stiff-necked race! I am not I, indeed.My self I’ve sacrificed; of God’s love have I need.From every fleshly sense and wish I’m severed, quite.115   God is my light, my mind, my visual organ’s site.I am not I. The breath I breathe is God’s own breath.Whoe’er gainsays this word, blasphemes, courts his own death.Within my form of fox there lurks the lion’s power;Against this feeble fox ’tis useless now to lower.Unless you lay aside scorn for my fox’s form,You’ll hear the lion growl more fierce than raging storm.” 
If Noah had not possessed the mighty aid of God,Could he a world have upside down turned with a nod?Within his form whole herds of lions, as one paw,120   Lay hid. A fire was he; the world a stack of straw.That misled straw refused to pay its tithe to him.Fire flashed. Forthwith the straw in smoke and flames sank grim. 
Whoe’er ‘gainst the hidden lion in saint’s formUpraise the voice of pride, like to our wolf, base worm,Shall, like that wolf, be torn by lion piecemeal quite;The text: “On them we vengeance took” he shall recite. A stroke shall lay him low, as wolf by lion’s paw.A madman must he be who’d rush in lion’s maw.O that the stroke had fallen upon the body frail;125   And that the heart and faith had ‘scaped! ‘Twere vast avail! 
Upon this point I feel my strength must all give way.How shall I tell the secrets of this mystic play?Just like the fox, do you yourselves deny in all.In lion’s presence raise no cavil, or you’ll fall.Relinquish thoughts of “I” and “We” when “He” ‘s afield.The kingdom is the Lord’s; to God the kingdom yield.The straight way enter all, like paupers as you are.The lion and the prey will both fall to your share. 
God is a spirit pure. All-Glorious is His name!He hath no need of praise, of honour, glory, fame!   130All these, and all besides, whatever may befall,Upon His servants He bestows. He’s Lord of all!God hath no envy, wish, desire for creatures’ ruths;And blessed is he who takes to heart this truth of truths.’Twas He created both worlds; — all their pomp and pride.Shall He desire what He hath made in His own tide?Keep, then, your hearts pure in the sight of God the Lord,That you may never be ashamed of thought or word.He knows the secrets, aims, desires of all your hearts;They’re patent to Him, as a hair in milk at marts.   135Whoever hath a breast cleansed from all thoughts of guile,His breast a mirror is, where heavenly truths will smile.Its secrets are all known to God; — its every part;“Believer’s heart’s the mirror of believer’s heart.”He tries our metal on the touchstone of His law.The fine, the base, He will distinguish, without flaw.Our talents being tried by His omniscient skill,What’s good, what’s bad, will sure appear, plain, by His will. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XII. Joseph and the Mirror 
The kings of yore a custom had, so I’ve been told,Of course thou’st heard it; — must remember it, of old,On their left hand their champions took their usual place;Because the heart is on the left of body’s space.Their chancellor and scribes stood on their right hand all;In that the writer’s art to the right hand doth fall.Before their face the holy teachers stood erect, — The mirrors of the soul; — than mirror more correct.Their breasts they’ve polished with the acts of thought and praise,5   That, mirror-like, they catch each image facts may raise.Each object born in nature with a lovely mienShould always have a mirror set to catch its sheen.A beauteous face enamoured is with mirror’s glance;Heart’s piety’s the polish best the soul can chance. 
A friend of tried sincerity came from afar,And guest became with trusty Joseph; — free from bar.They had been friends before, in childhood’s artless days;Had leant their elbows on one cushion, in their ways. 
His brethren’s envy and wrong-dealing touched upon,10   Said Joseph: “’Twas a chain. It bound a lion. ‘Non!Disgrace affects not lions, if with chains they’re bound.With God’s decree I quarrel not; — it’s always sound. 
A lion with a chain around his lordly neck,Is still the lord of them who forged the chain as check.”The friend asked: “How wert, in the well, the prison, cast?”Said Joseph: “As the moon in wane and change at last.” 
At change, the new moon’s bent in two, a poor weak thing,But ripens to the full apace, night’s matchless king. Pearls in a mortar pounded are, by chance, sometimes;Still, they’re esteemed a joy to glad eyes in all climes.   15Then, grains of wheat are cast into the lowly earth;But golden ears thence spring, a source of glee and mirth.These, too, are ground to dust in mill; — vile as to show;Increased in value, thence, bread it becomes, we know.Again ’tis crushed between the teeth; to chyme it turns,And feeds the mind, the thoughts, the soul; — in wisdom burns.The soul, in turn, is subject to the stress of love;New miracles, as seen, “the sowers marvel “ prove.But truce to these reflections; let us follow nowThe words of Joseph’s friend. ’Tis worth while these to know.   20 
That conversation closed, said Joseph to his guest:“What gift, my friend, hast brought in token of thy zest?” 
To go with empty hands and visit friends long missed,Is like a man who goes to mill without his grist.E’en God will ask His creatures in the judgment day:“What offerings have you brought to meet your Maker? Say!Alone, and empty-handed? Is it thus you come?E’en as We first created you? Gifts left at home?’ 
What have you brought as timely offerings in your hands?25   What are the gifts with which you’d grace your new life’s lands?Or, was it that you’d no belief in this return?Our promise of this day by you was laughed to scorn?If you denied thus the hope to be My guest,Then dust and ashes wait you in My realm, at best.If you did not deny it, whence your empty hands?How come you to a friend’s gate, scorning just demands?” 
Put by a little from thy daily meat and drink,So shalt thou have a store for offerings’ binding link.“Sleep little” when thou art of those “who lay them down.” 30   “Of mornings,” be of them who “ask for pardon’s crown.” Give signs of life, though slight; — as babes do in the womb;So may God grant thee inward light to cheer thy tomb.And when thou ‘scapest from dark and narrow prison there,Then mayst thou soar from earth beyond the realms of air.“The spacious land of God” ’tis named in holy writ, The land to which the prophets all have gladly flit.The heart is never lonesome in that vast abode;Its green trees never wither, frosts no leaves corrode.If now thou load thyself with sensual burden’s weight,35   Fatigued and jaded, faint thou’lt prove beneath their freight. 
In sleep thou bearest no burden; borne thou art, instead.Fatigue is thence recruited; — strength regains its head.Know then, thy sleep’s a foretaste of what is to come,From the rapt state of saints arriving at their home.The saints were well prefigured by the “Sleepers Seven.” “Their sleep,” “their stretchings,” “their awaking,” lead to heaven. 
Without the least exertion on their parts by acts,The “right and left-hand registers” draw them by facts.The “right-hand register” ‘s the record of good deeds; The “left-hand register” ‘s the list of fleshly greeds.   40But both of these abolished are in case of saints.To them such things are but as echo dies and faints.Though good and evil may their echoes round thee peal,The echoing mountain hears them not in the ordeal. 
Now Joseph once again inquired: “What offering bringest?”His friend, ashamed of urgent pressing, sighed. Thou singest?Said he: “Full many offerings have I sought and seen;But none was worthy of thee; or I much misween.How could I bring a diamond to its native mine;Or add a drop of water to a sea of brine?   45Shall I to Kāshān cummin bring, whence it is drawn, By offering up my life and soul to beauty’s fawn?I know no rarity that’s not surpassed by thee;Thy loveliness the rarity men nowhere see.The fittest present, then, I’ve found, a mirror is.And this I’ve brought; unsullied, bright, refulgent ’tis Therein thou’lt contemplate thy beauteous, matchless face,As beaming as the sun that decorates sky’s space.A mirror have I brought, thou charming, witching one;In it admire thyself; and think of me, when gone.”   50 
The mirror now he drew from underneath his skirt.A mirror is, to beauty, with attractions girt.In non-existence’ mirror if existence gleams,Present this mirror to it, thou, as best beseems.In non-existence mirrored, being we may see;As wealthy men their wealth may show by beggars’ glee. 
The hungry man’s the mirror best shows what is bread.And tinder mirrors flint and steel’s gleam, quickly spread.Wherever want, defect, is seen, beauty’s most prized.55   The mirror of perfection’s then best realised. 
If clothes grew, ready cut and sewn, to meet our needs,Where’d be the use of tailor’s art, to fashion weeds?The unhewn trunk is needed, for the carver’s skill,And carpenter, to cut out thence his frames, his thill.The surgeon hastens to the couch where suffering lies;Where limbs are broken, there his bandages he ties.Were there no patient, malady, no fever, ache,Could art sublime, the medical, its marvels make?If humble brass and copper were not to be found,60   Th’ alchemist’s stone could not to gold transmute them round.Defect is thus the mirror whence perfection’s seen;And vileness is the foil to show off grandeur’s sheen.By contrast does each opposite its fellow show,Sweet honey by sharp vinegar we best can know.The man who sees and feels his imperfections sore,Exerts himself to cure them quickly. all the more.And he’ll ne’er take his flight towards heaven’s eternal King,Who holds at heart the thought that he’s a perfect thing. 
No worse disease exists, to taint the human mind,65   Than self-conceit, that paints its owner gold refined.How many bitter tears has not the vain to shed,Ere arrogance can be expelled, and pride be dead!The malady of Satan, — self-conceit:— “I’m best,” Exists in germ in every panting human breast.These fancy they have mortified themselves throughout.Take them to be pure streams; their filth seek in the grout. 
Just stir them up a little, for a trial’s sake;Thou’lt see their mud discolour all the water’s lake.There’s ooze at bottom of the pond, — be sure of that, — However clear the surface of the dull dead flat.   70Our greatest teacher is endowed with fair device.He digs a conduit in the very soil of vice.How can he make the water of that conduit pure?All human wisdom’s but one spark from God’s vast store.Does sword inflict a wound in its own handle, — blade?Find me a surgeon who shall cure a gash so made.Where wound exists, the flies will ever flock amain,To hide its hideousness from sight, and lull the pain,Those flies the symbols are of man’s vain, baseless thoughts;The wound they cover over’s ignorance high-wrought.   75’Tis only when the teacher salve applies with skill,The throes are quieted that shoot across man’s will.He then imagines that his wound is healing fast.Effect this is of cunning used, that salve to cast.O man, whose back is galled, accept his salve with thanks.Thy solace thence arises; not from thy own pranks. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XIII. The Prophet’s First Amanuensis 
There was a scribe , before ‘Uthmān had filled that post,Most diligent in noting revelation’s host.Whatever text the Prophet had to promulgateOn parchment did this scribe trace all its terms of fate. 
The splendour of those inspirations filled his soul.His mind became enlightened, as a glowing coal.The substance of that wisdom from the Prophet came.The silly scribe imagined ’twas his genius’ flame:“The texts the Prophet promulgates with rare effect,5   Appear verbatim in my mind, without defect.” 
The Prophet was aware of this egregious sin.The wrath of God descended from high heaven’s welkin.The scribe renounced his office, and his faith at once.Religion’s fiercest foe he stood now, for the nonce.The Prophet questioned him: “Benighted, wretched man!If light there be in thee, whence this thy darkest plan?Hadst thou a fountain of God’s truth been, verily,This turbid stream had never flowed thence, heavily.” 
Not caring to expose his scribe to all his friends,10   The Prophet held his peace, to watch th’ adventure’s ends. 
The scribe’s heart hardened more and more as time rolled on.Repentance he felt not; his pride grew thereupon.He sighed. His sighs were not the signs of contrite heart;But tokens sure that justice made him feel its smart.God caused his pride to weigh more heavy than a chain.How many thus are fettered; none can heal their pain.His blasphemy and pride held him in iron grip;His very sighs he felt constrained to stifle on his lip.He cried: “‘The iron collars they’re compelled to wear;’ There’s naught but iron collars; these are all we bear!   15‘Behind them is a barrier; but We’ve bound their eyes,’ So that they see not what’s before, behind those ties.” 
The barrier so upreared appears a level plain;He knows not ’tis a bourn that checks him like a chain.Thy witness is a barrier, bars sight of the Lord;Thy teacher is a veil, shuts out God’s holy word.How many infidels, oh! long faith to possess!Their pride, their honour, stands between them and success.That barrier, unseen, ‘s than iron firmer still.An axe can hew through iron; not through stubborn will.   20A bond of iron may be broken by due means;A moral bond is what holds firmest, where it leans. 
A bee, a wasp, may sting one to the very quick;Yet may the same be warded by precaution’s trick.But what’s to do when sting is in our very selves?The pain is then most biting, deeper far it delves.Unwillingly has leaped this subject from my mind.I fear ‘twill leave despair in many, deep behind.Despair thou not; take consolation to thy soul;And cry to that Deliverer who can make thee whole:   25“Thou Lover of forgiveness! Pardon to me grant!Physician of the soul! Relieve my direful want!” 
Such counsel wise drove mad that erring sinner, quite.Think not of him. ‘Twill tire thy mind beyond respite.My friend! This counsel tells with equal force on thee.It flows through all the saints, though transient thou it see.Within the house a gleam of light has been espied.This light comes from a neighbour’s lamp, with oil supplied.Give thanks for it. Be not puffed up. Snort not, good man!30   To me lend ear. Presumption chase to utmost span.Alas! that this most transient ray of dubious light,The nations has seduced from God’s sole path of right.I’ll be the very slave of him, who, at each stage,Will not suppose the goal ’tis of his pilgrimage.How many stages are there must be left behind,Before the traveller reach the home he bears in mind.Although the iron may glow red, the colour’s notIts own; ’tis but reflection of the fire that’s hot.A window or a house with light may be suffused;35   But still, the source of light is in the sun, diffused.Each wall, each gate, may cry amain: “I shine! I shine!I have no need of other’s light. ’Tis mine! ’Tis mine!”But then the sun demurs: “O thing of little sense!So soon as I shall set, thy darkness will be dense!”The plants may think their verdure’s all their very own.So fresh, so green; so pleasant every flower full-blown.But then again the summer season makes comment:“When I am past, your present charms will soon be spent.” 
A beauty’s lovely body prides itself as fair.40   Her spirit, having hid itself within its lair,Remarks: “Thou dunghill! Wherefore all this silly pride?Thou bloomest but a day or two, while I preside.Thy affectation, vanity, ‘s too vast for me.But stay till I depart: then straightway thou shalt see.Thy lovers then shall loathe thy charms, adored before.To worms, and toads, and snakes they’ll fling thee, as cheap store. 
Thy stench shall make him hold his nose in deep disgust,Who lately in thy presence would have licked the dust.” 
Reflections from the spirit are the tongue, the eye, the ear.Accessions from the fire steam’s bubbles ’tis upbear.   45E’en as the soul’s reflection on the body acts,Reflection from th’ inspiring saints my soul impacts.When my soul’s life shall quit my soul, alack-a-day!My soul shall lifeless be, like mortal soulless clay.’Tis therefore that I cast myself down in the dust,That earth may witness bear for me before th’ All-Just. 
In day of judgment, “when the earth shall quake with fear,” Earth shall itself bear witness to my prayerful tear.Command shall issue: “Loud proclaim the acts thou’st seen.”The earth, the rocks, a tongue shall find, to tell what’s been.   50Philosophers deny this, in their pride of mind;But tell them: “Dash your heads against a wall, ye blind!”The speech of earth, of water, and of plastic clay,Is audible unto the ears of saints that pray.Philosophers who will deny God’s saving grace,Are strangers to the powers of saints’ inspired race.He holds that inclination, working on man’s brain,Gives rise to heated phantasy’s legerdemain.True, his own blasphemy and lack of firm beliefHave raised in him denial’s phantom, reason’s thief.   55Philosophers deny the devil does exist;While they themselves his sport are, in his cursed fist.Hast never seen the devil? Look at thy own self!Who’d paint his forehead blue, unless deceived by elf? 
Whoever hath a doubt or trouble in his mind,In secret’s a philosopher, as you may find.He wears the outward semblance of belief; but then,Anon and ever his philosophy claims pen.Beware, all ye believers! In you lurks this germ;60   Within yourselves lies latent vile deception’s sperm.The two and seventy sects are all within your hearts, And only wait a chance to play their fatal parts. 
Whoever hath the bud of faith grown in his breast,As aspen-leaf must tremble, lest it be supprest.Thou laughest at the devil in thy foolish pride;Thyself thou hast imagined sin’s stern deicide.But when thy soul shall manifested be to all,Sad sighs and moans shall rise from those who’re seen to fall.Exhibitors of base coin in this world below65   Smile now; the touchstone yet is hidden in form’s glow. 
O Veiler of men’s sins! Lift not Thy veil from us! In day of trial be our Helper, gracious!Adulteration now contends with purest coin;The gold awaits the day of trial to rejoin.It slily thinks in its mute way, without ado:“Await a little, false ones! Trial comes! Soho!For was not Satan’s self, in ages long gone by,Of light an angel, Prince of Powers, a galaxy,Until he envied Adam in his froward heart?70   And then he fell, an outcast from heaven’s high rampart.The son of Beor, Balaam, in the world’s esteem,Was equal unto Moses. So all men did deem. 
To him alone was homage paid by high and low;His prayers were reckoned medicine for every woe.To Moses he opposed himself, in foolish pride.The Scripture tells us how most miserably he died. Of Balaams, and of Satans, in this world of ours,Some manifest, some secret, troops come at all hours.God granteth them celebrity within their spheres,That they may witness bear against their own compeers.   75Then, both are elevated on a gallows high,As warning unto others who for honours sigh.They both were covetous of homage and applause;And both received due punishment through God’s just laws. 
Thou, man, perchance, the idol of some crowd mayst be.For God’s sake, then, beware thou transgress not as he.And setting up thyself against a better man,Thou come to grief, and bring to wreck thy every plan.The tales of ‘Ād and Thamūd have the moral clear,That saints of God, and righteous men, are held more dear.   80Those signs, and swift destruction overwhelming them,Proclaim aloud the power that saints around does hem. 
As brutes are slain that man may live a life of ease,So men are slaughtered when they sin ‘gainst God’s decrees.For, what is wisdom? ’Tis th’ omniscience divine.Man’s wisdom is but folly, set against that mine.The brutes are timid, shun man’s presence everywhere;Though man, in numbers, yields to them within this sphere.Their blood may lawfully be shed for needs of man;Because they lack th’ ennobling spark of reason’s scan.   85The brute is held of low degree on this our earth;As being weighed against great man’s superior worth. 
What value will attach to thee, thou arrant fool,If, like an ass, thou spite the lords of reason’s school?The ass, that renders service meet unto his lord,Men slay not. ’Tis the wild ass does them chase afford.The ass reaps naught of recompense for merit due;Yet, when he errs, fell punishment awaits him, true.If man, then, go astray, much more he’s worthy blame;90   Most justly shall chastisement visit him with shame.The blood of misbelievers righteously is shed,With sword and arrow, like wild ass on mountain fed.Their wives and children fall a prey to victor’s hand;In that they lack true wisdom, cursed of God they stand.The reasonable creature fleeing reason’s Lord,Renounces reason, brute becomes, calls for the sword. 
Hārūt, Mārūt, two angels famed throughout the earth,Through pride and insolence lost paradise for dearth.They trusted in the wondrous power they held of old;95   As though a buffalo ‘gainst lion should wax bold.His horns are mighty weapons, fearful to the foe;The lion tears him piecemeal; horns but work him woe.Had he as many horns as hedgehog quills, all o’er,They’d help him not; the lion still would him o’erpow’r. 
The hurricane roots up the forest trees amain;While pliant reeds from it no injury sustain.The fury of the blast hurts not their supple ease.Of strength, then, boast thee not, man. Seek wrath to appease.The axe is nothing daunted, seeing boughs of trees;100   But, one by one, hews through them all; their end foresees.The axe sets not its trenchant edge to lop off leaves;’Tis not the silky down of thistles that it cleaves.A flame is not abashed, though many thorns collect;Whole herds of sheep can never butcher’s knife deflect. 
To inward idea’s power the outward sign must yield.That power, ’tis, makes revolve the heavens’ vast starry field.The sphere, the circling firmament, consider now.What makes it turn? A force that rest will not allow.The movements of our bodies have no other source; — The soul it is originates all vital force.   105The circulation of the air’s from an idea;The millstone turns by water from the fields’ area.The ebb and flow of tides, breath drawn, again expired,Whence all? ’Tis life compels, diffused through all, respired.The spirit ’tis decides what words our pen shall write;Or peace, or war, or anything our minds indite.To right, to left we go, e’en as the spirit wills;A rose, a thorn, — the spirit says which place it fills. 
Our God it was who sent this vital air in blasts,Like breath of dragons, to destroy old ‘Ād’s outcasts.   110While to the faithful it gave peace, and health, and strength;In gentle zephyrs softly breathing whole days’ length.The Prophet hath assured us God’s the soul of all.The Lord’s the ocean whence the rills of spirit fall.The strata of the heavens and earth, with all therein,Are merely straws afloat on waves where powers begin.They dance about, are carried here and there by turns;Their movement’s from the waves that power divine still churns.Decrees this they shall be at rest? At once they’re flungAside upon the shore, there to decay like dung.   115Wills it that they be tossed about on waves high-flown?They’re but the leaves of autumn by the wild winds blown.Now turn we from this subject, most engaging still,To learn about those angels, victims of self-will. 
The sins of all mankind were known to them as sure;No wickedness escapes the glance of spirits pure.In anger at such baseness they were moved to scorn;Their own defect was hidden from their sight, heaven-born. 
An ugly man once saw his face in looking-glass.120   He turned away enraged with that reflecting mass.So, when one self-conceited sees another’s fault,A flame from hell is lighted in his bad heart’s vault.’Tis pride inflames him; — holy zeal he dubs it straight;Not conscious of the vanity that makes his freight.A zeal for holiness by other tokens shines;And lights a fire by which to ashes earth declines. 
God said to them: “If you both shine with virtue’s ray,No notice take of man’s backslidings from its way.Give thanks and praises, rather, you’re not made like them.125   Lusts of the flesh, concupiscence, soil not your stem.Had I imposed upon you that great burden, sore;The heavens would not have been your home for evermore.The chastity that decks your spirit-nature now,Reflection is of purity that lights My brow.Know, this is but a quality you hold from Me.So shall th’ accursed one not make you slaves to be!”E’en as the Prophet’s scribe, with self-importance puffed,Imagined holy wisdom’s light shone as he’d stuffed.Himself he fancied equal of prophetic quire;130   His raven croak as their sweet song he dared admire.He who sets up to write the notes of every bird,Knows not th’ inspiring springs within their bosom stirred.Could man acquire the note of nightingale so sweet,Would he have learnt as well its love the rose to meet?Should he achieve a notion of that love’s intent;’Twould be mere surmise, like deaf man’s from lips’ consent. 
Such deaf man once was made aware by some kind friend,That next door dwelt an invalid near to his end.The poor man thought within himself: “I’m deaf as stone,How can I hope to comprehend this neighbour’s tone?   135More ‘specially as sick men speak so very low.Still, go I must; mere decency demands my bow.When I advance, he’ll me address, his lips will move.From thence I’ll glean a notion, may not quite false prove.I’ll ask him how he feels to-day, ‘mid so much pain.He’ll answer surely: ‘Thank you; better in the main:Reply I will: ‘Most happy! How’s the appetite?’He’ll answer: ‘Pretty good, if chicken-broth invite.’I’ll say: ‘Good! Good! And what are you allowed to drink?Who is your doctor?’ He’ll respond, as one may think.   140Then I’ll remark: ‘With so much talent at command,You can’t do better. Soon I hope to see you stand.I’ve had experience of his skill; I know his worth;With him as guide, you’ll not go wrong.’ So forth.” 
Thus having got his fancied answers all by heart,He goes to see the sick man; deftly plays his part.On asking: “How are you?” the patient says: “Near dead.”The deaf man straight rejoins: “Of that I’m very glad.”The sufferer felt insulted by this joy expressed.The deaf one had surmised, — had failed in what he’d guessed.   145He now inquired the diet: “Oh! It’s poison all!”Complained the sick man. “Glad to hear it,” he let fall.Still more the patient wondered. “Who attends you, pray?”Asked Deafy; “whose advice is’t leads you on your way?”“Death tracks my hours!” said he; “pray leave me now to rest.”The other answered: “Better can’t be found; he’s best.” 
The visitor retired, quite pleased with his rich art;And offered thanks for having played so kind a part.The sick man, on the contrary, was all on fire:150   “Whence comes this malice? Who has roused his soul to ire?”So, turning in his mind the matter o’er and o’er,A message he determines that shall pay the score.Just so, a man who’s eaten ill-digesting food,Can have no rest till it’s ejected, well and good.Long-suffering is thy better part, reject it not;With patience, thou shalt find soft words best heal a plot.But our sick man found no such solace for his mind;He called the deaf one “Ass,” and “Fool,” and “Sot,” and “Blind.”Said he: “I’ll serve him out; I’ll pay him what’s his due!155   Till then, my spirit will his hateful visit rue!A visit to the sick’s for consolation’s sake;His visit I abhor, his insults I’ll not take.He’s wished to gloat on foe laid prostrate at his feet;Some joy to gather thence his secret hate to greet.” 
How many pious men there are, to outward view,Reward of joy in heaven, as object, who pursue.At heart they’re sinners still, despite the show they make.Alas! Hypocrisy for righteousness they take!Just as our deaf man thought he’d done a friendly act;160   And yet, withal, had vexed his neighbour, as a fact.He soothed his soul by thinking: “Kindly part I’ve played!I’ve acted as a neighbour! Sorrow I’ve allayed!”Whereas, in truth, a fire he’d lighted for himself;And his sick neighbour’s heart inspired with vengeful elf. 
Beware the fires you kindle by such acts as this!Beware offence to give, while proffering a kiss!The Prophet said one was a hypocrite, he knew:“Go, worship, friend; thy act’s no worship, as I trew!” 
For fear lest we should trespass, even as we pray,Our worship has the prayer: “Lord, guide us in Thy way!”   165“Permit not Thou, O God, that my devotion’s actBe counted erring hypocrite’s unwelcome pact!” 
The surmise of our deaf man wide was of the mark.A ten years’ friendship ’twould have wrecked! Beware such spark!Man’s judgment, friend, that’s based on sense’s treacherous sand,Can never be compared with revelation’s wand.Hast ear to hear? Hast mind to recognise the truth?Know, then, thy moral ear is deaf to godly soothThe first who followed sense, and reason — as he thought — Instead of God’s true light, the devil was, we’re taught.   170He judged: “The fire more noble is than sordid earth;From fire was I created; clay gave Adam birth.The stock from whence it springs decides each kind of fruit;From darkness Adam’s sprung; light at my birth did suit.” 
The Lord replied: “’Tis not a question of descent.Pre-eminence is here the prize of righteous bent.’Tis not a heritage of worldly wealth to share.Why talk of ancestry? Heart’s qualities declare.The heritage we’ve now to give is prophecy;The heirs thereto are they whose spirits hate a lie.   175The son of Abū-Jahl believed, and saved his soul; A son of Noah rebelled; became perdition’s goal. The son of earth was made resplendent as the moon;Thou, son of fire, begone, disgraced, cursed, none too soon!” 
Investigations, reasonings, on days of cloud,By night, in darkness, guide the doubting crowd; 
But, when the sun shines, — when God’s temple’s clearly seen,No doubt remains which way to turn one’s face, I ween.The temple hidden, its direction quite unknown,180   Then use thy judgment. God this method’s kindly shown. 
Whene’er you hear a note of God’s truth-warbling bird, You straightway seize its literal sense, just as ’tis heard.You then use suppositions of your darksome mind,And form, through wrong conclusions, guesses worse than blind.The saints use terms of technical significance,Unknown to worldly reasoners’ crass ignorance.The language of the bird you learn, as to its notes;But clean destroy its sense; as sure as fancy dotes. 
E’en as the sick man of our tale, saints’ hearts are grieved;185   Though, like the deaf man, you suppose you’ve good achieved.The scribe of writ inspired had all its text by heart;Then thought himself inspired; — would play a prophet’s part.The Prophet, warbler-like, smote him with powerful wing;He forthwith sank to blind despair, through conscience’ sting.So ’tis with you. Perversely, or with vain surmise,You would interpret words descended from the skies.Like Hārūt, and like Mārūt, well you’ve learnt the tuneThey sang of old in pride: “We’re God’s elect,” jejune.You pray for grace on all the sins of wicked men;190   You curse your own foul egotism, greed’s hungry ken. 
Beware lest God’s just jealousy break forth amain,And smite you to the earth, ne’er more to rise again. 
Those angels owned, in words: “To rule is Thine, O God.Without Thy strong protection, safety’s soon downtrod.”Such were their lip-words. But their hearts’ rebellious pride,With foolish boasting, thought: “No harm can us betide.”They never ceased to brood on vanities thus framed,Till fire of arrogance burst forth from breasts inflamed;Then proclamation made: “O elemental men!How little have ye known the range of angel’s ken.   195We’ll weave dense curtains o’er the sky’s revolving face;Descending then to earth, we’ll there our temple place.We’ll justice distribute, and worship we’ll commend,Returning every night to heaven, whence we descend.So shall we be admired by all who dwell on earth,And fill the world with gladness, safety, peace, and mirth.”Alas! Such fancy’s false! Earth cannot heaven be;Their difference is radical, as all may see! 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XIV. The Chinese and Roman Artists 
Give ear to this advice from one who’s well informed:“Lay down your head where’er by wine you’ve been transformed.”Whene’er a drunken man reels forth from tavern door,A laughing-stock he’s made by urchin and by boor.Now here, now there, he lurches, stumbling on his road;Falls in the mire; is mocked and jeered, scorned as a toad.The children of the neighbourhood his steps surround,Unconscious what is wine’s hilarity profound. 
So are all people children, round the saints of God;5   None adults are, save they who’ve cast off passion’s clod.’Twas said: “The world’s a toy, a plaything; and men allAre infants.” These are God’s words. True in sense they fall.No child but loves his toys, his playthings, games, and sports;By cultivation of the mind man sense imports. 
Man’s love for worldly things is like child’s love for toys;The child and man, in these, repeat each other’s joys.The child, in play, performs the very selfsame part,He’ll act when grown a hero, learnt debating art. 
Men’s quarrels are the same as those fought out by boys;They’re senseless, reasonless; they squabble for mere toys.   10Their weapons are but wooden swords, as used in play;Their objects are not worth a thought, by night or day.They mount their hobby-horses, ride about on sticks;Declaring ’tis Bucephalus, Eclipse, that kicks.’Tis they who bear a burden, pack-horse-like, or ass;Their vanity converts them into horsemen’s mass. 
So let it be till that day when God’s riders shall,On steeds of fire, transcend the seventh heaven’s rolling ball.“The spirit and the angels mount unto their God.” The spheres shall shake, when under saintly footsteps trod.   15Whereas the raff of mankind mount their own coat-tails;Imagining they’re horsemen, prancing as ship sails. 
The Lord hath said: “Imagining’s of no avail.” Imagination’s steed to scale heaven’s heights must fail.Imagination’s best is but a choice of doubts;Man ne’er disputes about the sun, whate’er the whim he flouts.The time will come, he’ll see what wretched screw he rides;That which he deemed a courser’s but his own shanks’ sides.His senses, thoughts, and reasonings, he then will find,Are but the infant’s hobby, pa’s cane, more refined.   20 
The wisdom of the saints is what bears them aloft.The science of the worldly is their load; — how oft!The wisdom of the heart sustains and elevates;But knowledge sensuously acquired as burden rates.’Tis God hath said: “An ass with volumes for his load.” So knowledge is a burden, when not of God’s code. 
All science not received from word of God direct,Hath no endurance; paint it is; our eyes detect. 
Still, if man bear his burden well, he’s recompensed;25   His burden is removed; ease to him is dispensed.See, then, you bear not science’ load from fleshly lust;Lest you should suffer inwardly fatigue, — disgust;But mount the agile steed of sacred lore divine;So shall the burden on your back at once decline.Unless you drink His cup, how ‘scape from fleshly lust?O you, who, in His name, content are with the Just!When from His name and attributes some inkling’s born,This inkling points the road to union one fair morn.Thou’st never known a guide, but some one must be led;30   And when no road is travelled, gnome can’t dog man’s tread.Thou’st never heard a name, but indicates a thing;A flower thou’st never plucked from verbal rosa’s ding.Hast thou pronounced a name? Straightway the thing ensue.The moon seek in the sky; — not in lake-waters, blue.But wouldst thou cast aside all names and words, as vain,Thyself, then, purge of self. Abstraction thou shalt gain.Wouldst be a sword? Cast off soft iron’s yield refined;By discipline the mirror burnish of thy mind.Discharge thyself of every particle of self;35   So shalt thou see thyself pure, free from soil of pelf.Within thy heart thou’st see the wisdom of the saints,Without a book, a teacher, or professor’s plaints. 
The Prophet said: “That man is one of my true flock,Whose heart and mind are hewn from my own calling’s rock.His soul perceives me through the selfsame holy lightThat unto me reveals his soul serenely bright.Reports, traditions, chains of evidence, are lost;When soul communes with soul, minds freely can accost.” 
This riddle solve: “A Kurd I last night was, by birth;And then, this morning, Arab am, by afterbirth.”   40If one, sincere, a Kurdish boor was overnight,Sincerity an Arab made him by daylight.Example seekest of science springing in the heart?This contest heed of Chinaman and Roman’s art. 
The Chinese urged they had the greater painter’s skill.The Romans pleaded they of art the throne did fill.The sovereign heard them both; decreed a contest fair;Results the palm should give the worthiest of the pair. 
The parties twain a wordy war waged in debate;The Romans’ show of science did predominate.   45The Chinamen then asked to have a house assignedFor their especial use; and one for Rome designed,Th’ allotted houses stood on either side one street;In one the Chinese, one the Roman, artists meet. 
The Chinese asked a hundred paints for their art’s use;The sovereign his resources would not them refuse.Each morning from the treasury rich colours’ storeWas served out to the Chinese till they asked no more.The Romans argued: “Colour or design is vain;We simply have to banish soil and filth amain.”   50They closed their gate. To burnish then they set themselves;As heaven’s vault, simplicity filled all their shelves.Vast difference there is ‘twixt colours and not one.The colours are as clouds; simplicity’s the moon.Whatever tinge you see embellishing the clouds,You know comes from the sun, the moon, or stars in crowds. 
At length the Chinamen their task had quite fulfilled.With joy intense their hearts did beat, their bosoms thrilled.The sovereign came, inspected all their rich designs,55   And lost his heart with wonder at their talents’ signs.He then passed to the Romans, that his eyes might see.The curtains were withdrawn, to show whate’er might be.The Chinese paintings all, their whole designs in full,Reflected truly were on that high-burnished wall.Whatever was depicted by the Chinese artWas reproduced by mirrors, perfect every part. 
Those Romans are our mystics; — know, my worthy friend;No art, no learning; study, none; — but gain their end.They polish well their bosoms, burnish bright their hearts,60   Remove all stain of lust, of self, pride, hate’s deep smarts.That mirror’s purity prefigures their hearts’ trust;With endless images reflections it incrust. 
The formless Form the thousand thousand hidden formsFlashed in his breast on Moses’ heart, like mirrored storms.That Form, ’tis true, the heaven of heavens cannot contain;Nor all the space between the zenith and the main.These numbered are, and limited within their bounds;The mirror of the heart is boundless in its rounds. 
Here, reason stands aghast, O erring child of sense;65   The heart’s with God, — the heart is God, boundless, immenseFrom all eternity, the figures of all things,Unnumbered, multitudinous, gleam in heart’s wings.To all eternity each new-created formIn heart of saint reflected is, most multiform.His polished heart is cleansed from being’s soiling stain;And at each moment contemplates fresh beauty’s train. 
The outward gilt, the shell, of science they despise;The banner of real certitude floats where they rise.They’ve thought abandoned; light and life they’ve truly found;Their breasts and hearts are filled with love’s inspiring sound.   70 
Death, that dread thing of which all mankind stand in fear,Is laughed and mocked at by the saints, when it draws near.No man has power to dominate their tranquil minds.The shell may injured be; the pearl harm never finds.The rhetor’s art, the jurist’s skill, they set at naught;But poverty, abasement, to themselves they’ve taught.The scenes of all eight paradises are consumedIn that full blaze with which their holy heart’s illumed.They’re more exalted than the heavens and what’s beyond;Their place is in the court of love divine, all-fond. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XV. Zeyd’s Inspiration 
THE Prophet asked one morn of Zeyd, in tender tone, “How art thou, dear disciple, faithful to the bone?”“I’m pious; — a believer,” Zeyd replied; and heInquired again: “What proof of faith resides in thee?”He said: “Whole days I’ve burnt with parching fever’s thirst;By night I’ve watched; with love’s sweet pangs my heart’s nigh burst.Thus have I traversed days’ and nights’ enduring space,As point of spear through shield makes way in war’s embrace.For, in love’s view, the church of faith one body is;5   Ten million years, one instant, are alike, when His.The past eternity and future join in one;Though reason cannot compass how the marvel’s done.” 
The Prophet then: “Bring forth some souvenir from thence,Shall satisfy all men of judgment and of sense.”Said Zeyd: “As men behold the sky above their heads,So I survey the heavens, and all their flowery meads.Eight paradises, seven deep hells, are in my view,As patent as the idol to its silly crew. 
Apart, and one by one, I can discern all men,As wheat and barley well are known to miller’s ken.   10I see who’s heavenward bound, who takes the other road;As men distinguish fish from snake in walks abroad.” 
’Tis thus that saints, within the bounds of present life,See who’ll be blessed, who cursed, when tried in judgment’s strife;Before each soul contracts the sins will cause its shame;While yet in mother’s womb, — while yet without a name.The wretch is he conceived for wretchedness’ sad thirst.Each soul is marked for future bliss or woe, at first. The body, as a mother, bears within a soul.Death’s but the throes that launch the spirit to its goal.   15Departed souls are all agog at each fresh birth,To see what class the new-born enters in its mirth.The blacks presume ‘twill prove to be of their dark gang;The pale-faced Romans hope they’ll profit by the pang.But when the little stranger shows itself at last,No room remains for doubt; the question’s judged and cast.The new-born black is borne in triumph by its kind;The rosy-cheeked fair bantling’s claimed by Roman mind.Until its birth the child’s a riddle to all men.Who knows an unborn infant ‘s rare sage in this glen.   20Unless, mayhap, he see with light divine’s blest aid;For this can penetrate through densest shell e’er made.The life-conveying fluid’s colourless and clear;But living men their various shades of colour bear.The soul sustains complexions in our mortal frames,Until our halves material find rest from their games.But turn we now away to other subjects, high;For fear events should leave us to regret and sigh. 
“When settling-day ‘brings forth the colour of each face,’ 25   Mankind are separated sharply, race from race.Within the womb nor Turk, nor Hindū, yet is seen; So soon as born, all, high and low, know what to ween.As in the day of judgment all men all will know,So now to me each man and woman forms a show.Say: Shall I all declare; or shall I hold my peace?”To this the Prophet in reply made motion: “Cease.”“Ha! Prophet of the Lord! I’ll tell that secret, all!To men I will declare the deeds of that dread hall!Permit me to tear off the veil that hides it now;30   My heart shall light the world as sun in midday glow.I will eclipse that lamp, by giving out more light.I will set plainly forth the thorn and fig-tree right.Th’ events of judgment day I’ll lay before all men.I’ll separate the gold from spurious coin, as then.They of the left hand shall be maimed to public view, And all shall then the fruits of misbelief eschew.I will expose the seven pits of wrath divine, By aid of light from truth’s great luminary’s shine.I’ll rend away the rags that veil the wicked’s shame.35   I’ll sound the trump, that all may hear the Prophet’s name.Hell, heaven, the gulf between, I’ll set before men’s eyes,That misbelievers may be warned of error’s dyes.The fountain of ‘Kawthar’ shall throw its highest jet; Its rush shall greet their ears, its spray their faces wet.They who will flock around it, burning with fierce thirst,I’ll make apparent unto all, from last to first.Their shoulders jostle ‘gainst my shoulders in the crowd;Their shrieks are sounding in my ears, as thunder loud. 
While heaven’s citizens, rejoicing with delight,Hug one another lovingly, to glad my sight.   40They visit one another’s thrones, high rapture’s seats;They kiss each other fondly; each all others greets.My ears grow deaf through listening to those cries of grief,And sorrow’s anguish from the lips where sin sat chief.These are slight indications; much more could I say;1   pause; the Prophet’s wearied; cease from speech I may.” 
Thus spake the Prophet’s servant, in delirious guise.The Prophet shook his collar, — sign of deep surprise.Then spake: “Rein in thy steed! He risks to run awayReflected Truth declares: ‘God blushes not.’ Heyday!   45The mirror’s fallen out from its protecting case!A mirror and a balance never truth debase!A mirror and a balance never facts conceal,Although some one be hurt by what they do reveal!The mirror and the balance tests are of my rule;Though for a thousand years thou serve it’s strict formule.Hide not the truth from thought of deep respect for me.Show forth the whole, in full. Deficiency mayn’t be.What is’t that tells thee: ‘Play not, joke not with the truth?’  The mirror, balance, God, — who smites falsehood with truth!   50Sure, God hath raised me up for that one sole intent,That through me truth be preached unto its full extent.Were this not so, what value’s in me, valued friend?Did I become instructor, only good to mend?But shut thy mirror tight within its felten sack,If Sion’s miracle’s repeated in thy track.” 
Said Zeyd: “Can man e’er grasp beneath his feeble armThe sun of truth, eternal luminary, warm? 
’Twould burst his grasp asunder; all his wiles were vain,55   Though madness he should add to reason in his brain!” 
Replied the Prophet: “On thy eye thy finger place;The world is straight deprived of all the sun’s bright face!A finger-tip suffices to blot out the moon;A symbol, this, of God’s great sin-effacing boon.A point can cover up a whole world with its shade;The sun can be eclipsed by what’s a mere monade.Shut close thy lips. Consider now the mighty sea.By God’s command the ocean man’s meek slave must be. Ev’n as the fountains Selsabīl and Zenjabīl 60   Are given for use of angels, Michael, Isrāfīl The rivers four of paradise are at our beck;Not by our merit, but by God’s constraining check.Where’er we will, they flow, obedient to our call;Like magical effect, magician’s docile thrall.So also are our eyes, those founts of sentient beams,Subservient to our will, whichever way it streams.As we direct, they look; see what’s like adder’s sting;Or notice facts that to our minds their warnings bring.If so we will, they scrutinise objectiveness;65   As we desire, they lend themselves to study dress.By our direction, universals are their bound;If so we wish, they prisoners are in partials’ ground.Each of the senses five acts thus but as a spout,To bring unto the mind that which it cares about.Whichever way the heart directs them forth to stroll,They turn, and glean a harvest for its pleasure sole.The hands and feet are servants to the heart’s request,As Moses’ rod obedient was to his behest.At heart’s desire, the feet begin the nimble dance,70   Or seek advantage, or avoid some sore mischance. 
The heart commands, the hands to calculations fall;Should it prefer, they write a book or treatise small.A hand there is, ’twould seem, within these hands of ours;A hidden hand, that moves the body’s wondrous powers.If that incites, this wages battle with the foe;Should that induce, this aids a friend to stand tiptoe.It pushes; straightway spoon’s plunged into soup;It wills; a ponderous club forthwith attacks some group.What is it that the heart says to them all by turns?Most wonderful accord! Most marvellous alterns!   75The ancient seal of Solomon the heart has found!With that alone it guides the senses o’er their ground.Externally, five senses serve its high command;Internally, five faculties obey its hand.Ten senses, thus, seven organs, wait upon its wants;Besides a host of minor servants, confidants.As Solomon thou sittest, O heart! Thou reignest supreme!On fairy and on demon, set thy seal, thy scheme.In this thy realm be upright; practise thou no fraud;No demon, then, shall rob thee of thy seal, thy gaud.   80The world shall learn thy name, shall practise all thy rites;Time and eternity remain thy perquisites.But should a demon carry off thy seal, perchance,Thy reign is o’er; thy fortune loses all advance.Thenceforward vain regret shall canker in thy breast,Until the day thou’rt called to thy account at last.Unless thy heart renounce all selfish use of wit,By mirror and by balance canst thou be held quit?” 
Luqmān the sage, in presence of his noble lord, Among the slaves and servants was a mere byword.   85 
The lord one day commanded; straight some slaves were sentTo gather fruit from orchard for his throat’s content.With them did Luqmān go, as parasite to feast,Brimful of wisdom, black as night, a negro beast.Their labour o’er, the slaves lay down to rest awhile;The fruit they tasted, tasted still, consumed the pile.Returning home, on Luqmān the whole blame they laid;His lord was angered mightily at what they said.Luqmān inquired the cause of this estrangement keen.90   The lord gave vent in loud abuse to his roused spleen.Said Luqmān: “Lord, I swear by God’s most holy name,Dishonest servant ne’er can hope for aught but blame.Make proof of us. ’Tis easy. Lord thou art of all.Command. We’ll drink our fill of water hot as gall.Then make us run about within the meadow’s bound.On horseback thou, on foot we, ‘ll all trudge quickly round.Thou soon shalt witness sights to show ‘the milk who spilt.’Hearts’ secrets’ Great Revealer will disclose the guilt.” 
Their lord so ordered. Scalding water soon was sought.95   Each had to drink his fill, as hot as could be brought.Then all were made to run as fast as they could tear,All up and down the meadow, as their legs could bear.Now lo! What happens? Sickness on them, each, soon falls;To vomit they’re constrained, with starting of eyeballs.The stolen fruit contained within their stomach’s sack,The water’s stimulus compelled them to give back. 
When Luqmān’s turn was come to cast up his accounts,Clear water was the only issue from his founts.Luqmān’s philosophy this trial could evolve;God’s wisdom far abstruser riddles will resolve.   100“The day when our hearts’ secrets shall be all revealed,”Man’s secret foe in ambush shall not lie concealed.Hell’s victims, then, shall taste of scalding water’s pang;And all veils be torn off from sins they overhang.Hell-fire’s decreed to be the lot of misbelief;Since fire the ordeal is by which stones come to grief. 
How often have we spoken to those hearts of stone,In softest accents of advice! They would hear none!To foulest ulcer, sharpest remedy’s applied.The teeth of dogs alone are fit for ass’s hide.   105“Filth to the filthy” is philosophy right sound.“Birds of a feather flock together” goes its round.What mates soever for thyself thou choose at last,Their habits and their qualities acquire thou fast.Wouldst glory have? To glory must thou raise pretence.Wouldst it reject? Think well; and take thy road from thence.Wouldst find a way out of this dismal dungeon vile?Submit to God; bow down in worship with a smile.Again we’ll turn. Again we’ll hear what Zeyd may say;What road he’ll follow, on his steed, in reason’s way.   110When reason sets itself t’ expose the faults of men,It pulls aside the veils that hide them from our ken.God sometimes wills that actions should concealed remain,Drives reason’s drum away, forbids its noisy strain. 
Loose not thy tongue alone; it bridle; hidden’s best.Let each be happy in his own opinion’s zest.God wills that they who might despair to win His grace,Shall persevere, not slacken, in their worship’s pace 
That they may seek a hopeful one, and him ensue; — 115   In his society may follow worship’s clue.God wishes that His peace should light upon us all;That His salvation should embrace good, bad, great, small.That princes and that captives all should turn their face,In hope and fear, up heavenward, looking for His grace. 
That hope and fear are nourished by a curtain’s shade.’Tis through uncertainty that hope and fear invade.But tear away that veil; where then are hope and fear?’Tis veiledness lends interest to landscapes drear.Upon a river’s bank a youth, who chanced to spy120   A fisherman at work, guessed: “Solomon, surely! If he it be, why here, in secret and alone?If not, whence come those features, fit to grace a throne?”So he remained in doubt, ‘twixt two opinions tossed,Till Solomon recovered all the power he’d lost. 
The foul usurping demon fled the royal state;The king’s avenging sword pursued and sealed his fate.The signet-ring of power once more on royal hand,The demons and the fairies flocked to his command.Mankind came crowding to his court, by levee swelled;125   Among them came the youth who’d that opinion held.He saw the signet-ring. This sufficed. Doubt was past.No room was left for surmise. All was clear at last. 
Opinion may be formed of what’s behind a veil.Conjecture lends its aid where knowledge ‘gins to fail.Conjecture’s potent when the subject’s hid from view.Let it be visible; no surmise can we brew.Although the sky of light is not without its rain,The earth of darkness, too, produces plants and grain. 
I love that text: “They who believe what is not seen.” Thence have I closed my eyes, the body’s windows keen.   130But should I cleave the firmament with my swift glance,Could I exclaim: “Perceivest thou a flaw, perchance?” To scrutinise what’s hid behind the darkness’ screen,Each man his method chooses; guesses what’s between.A certain space of time confusion reigns supreme.The robbers hang the magistrates by their own scheme,Until at length a Chief, blessed with a genius rare,Springs up to serve his servants; all their troubles share. 
To render secret service is a thing beloved.To hide a service rendered adds to what’s approved.   135What’s he, commends his king with lies before his face,And in his absence needs lament his lack of grace? 
The warden of a castle on the marches laid,Far from his sovereign, distant from much-needed aid,Defends his post with valour from beleaguering foe,Disdains to be bought over, scorns the tempter’s moe.His station’s on a frontier, no eye sees him act;To duty true, he honestly fulfils his pact.Then in his monarch’s presence honours due he gains,Above the brave men fighting in the royal trains.   140More merit’s in a little secret service given,Than in much more performed when by an eye it’s driven. 
Man’s faith and piety on earth are prized of God.But after death professed, less value have than clod.The absent and the hidden being thus the best,The silent mouth and sealed lip surpass the rest.Then boast not, brother; whatsoever thou hast done,God knows thy merits; will requite them every one. 
The sun requires no other witness but his face.145   Man has a greater. God’s his witness. Vast the grace!If I proclaim it not, how many are preparedTo witness to each fact! God, angels, men, full wared.“God will bear witness, angels, and all they who’ve known,” That: “Lord there is no other, save th’ Eternal One.” When God himself our witness is, who’ll angels need,That they should share, participate, in His sole deed?Unless it be that, as the fervent, blazing sun,Pours forth such beams no mortal eye can look upon.Just like the bat, man cannot bear full light of day;150   So, in despair, he seeks the darkness, shuns noon’s ray. 
Thus, like us, know, the angels are a loving crew,Who bask in beams of heaven’s Sun, beyond our view.They say: “Our light we have received from a sun;As substitutes we shine upon the weak, outrun.”As new-born moon, or five days old, or at the full,Each angel has his rank, degree, place, wonderful.His glorious wings in pairs, two, three, and even, four; So that his beams are doubled, trebled, fourfold, more.Just like the grades that mark the various human minds,155   Do differences vast exist in angels’ kinds.Thus every man’s companion-angel’s like himself,Or good, or bad, or high, or low, as china, delf.When weak-eyed mortals cannot look upon the sun,They have to seek for taper’s aid, ere they may run.The Prophet hath declared: “Stars, my disciples are;They’re lights to them who seek; though devils they may scare.”If every man had strength, and faculty of sight,To look straight at the sun, trust him alone for light, 
What need were for the stars, or lamps, of feeble ray,To help them on their path, in quest of source of day?   160 
The moon declares to man, as do the clouds, the shade,“I, too, ‘d been human, but for revelation made. Like you, I had been darksome, as within, without.But revelation gave me sunlight, shade to rout.Compared with the sun, I’m darksome as a cloud;Compared with men’s dark bosoms, I may well be proud.I shed a feeble light, that men may bear my beams,He cannot look upon the sun’s too ardent streams.I’ve mixed with honey vinegar; made oxymel;A remedy to bring to man’s diseases fell.”   165 
Art rid of thy disease, my friend? Then set asideThe vinegar. Rejoice thy soul with honey’s tide.When freed from lusts, the heart of man in full health shines.God said: “The Merciful on heaven’s high throne reclines.” God rules the heart direct, free from all means to aid,So soon as it is purged from dross that low it laid.We’ll now go back to Zeyd, and proffer him advice;We’ll warn him not to risk dishonour, paltering’s price. 
Thou shalt not Zeyd now find; he’s surely run away,He’s clean absconded by the door; had naught to say.   170Had’st thou been Zeyd, like him thou’dst lost been in a maze;As stars die out when sunlight sets the skies ablaze.E’en as no track points out where was galaxy’s place;Thou’lt find no signs of Zeyd, no footstep, sign, or trace. 
Our senses falter, all our reasoning is lost,In splendour of the wisdom of th’ All-Ruling Ghost. 
Men’s senses, and their reasons, must be shut within,“In waves when all before us to appear begin.” When night returns, the sky again a court appears,175   The hidden stars shine forth, and mark the rolling years.The senseless dead unto, will God their wits restore;In circles, like attendants, Him they’ll stand before.They’ll foot the dance, they’ll spread their hands, they’ll shout His praise;They’ll sing their song: “Thou, Lord, us from the dead didst raise.”Their mortal skins and bones they’ll shake off in the earth;On angel-wings they’ll ride, and whirlwind-dust call forth.Their course they’ll take from nullity to entity,In judgment day, ungrateful, grateful laity. 
Why turn away thy head, pretend not to have seen?180   Hast thou not, first, in nullity, a truant been?In nullity, so firm thou settedst down thy foot,And ask’dst: “Who shall remove me when I’ve taken root?”Dost thou not see the wondrous works of God’s high will?How He it is who “leads thee by thy forelock” still? He draws thee into states, conditions, turns of weal,That never entered in thy mind to seek with zeal. 
Nonentity obedient is to His command.Of demon, and of Solomon, He rules the hand.A demon can contrive “the trays of fishpond size.” 185   He dares not make refusal these to organise.Contemplate now thyself in agony of fear;And know, nonentity, too, quakes His wrath to hear.Thou stretchest forth thy hand to seize preferment’s place;From fear of thee, some soul itself must quick efface.All else but love of God, the Truest and the Best,Though sweet to thought, is but a snare to break thy rest. 
What’s all thy effort worth? Thou hast to die at last;Put out thy hand and grasp the cup of life right fast. 
Men fix their eyes on what is dust and ashes, death;Refuse belief in what is life and healthful breath.   190Exert thyself. Reduce thy doubts from ten to nine.Employ the night. Thou sleepest. Night’s not so supine.Employ the night to seek the everlasting day,Increase in knowledge. Wisdom ’tis shall light thy way.Though night be dark, and darkness be of woe the doom,Much good is in it. Fount of Life’s in land of gloom. 
How can a mortal hope to raise his head from sleep,When seeds of slothfulness are all he cares to reap?The dead man’s sleep’s the body-snatcher’s open door.Householders slumber, robbers rifle every floor.   195Thou knowest not who are thy foes around thee placed.The imps of hell are enemies to man high graced. 
The fire’s the foe of water and of water’s brood;As water’s foe to fire, and drowns it in a flood.To water, and its cousins all, the fire swears death;To fire shall water never quarter give, or breath.’Tis water puts the fire out; and the reason’s plain;The fire has mission to destroy the water’s strain. 
And then, the fire’s the heat of passion’s baneful lusts.And lust, the root of frailty, sin, misdeeds, mistrusts.   200Material, outer fire, ‘s by water soon put out;The fire of lust may carry man to hell, no doubt.No water can avail to quench the flames of lust;For lust is hell-born. Torments end not; last they must. 
Religion’s light, alone, can quench lust’s fiercest flame, — The light that can put out the Syntheist’s wicked game. What can extinguish fire of sin, save light of God?My master, see that Abr’am’s light be ne’er downtrod;That from the fire of lust, by inner Nimrod fanned, 205   Thy body may escape; not be, as firewood, banned.The lust of man’s desires cannot be driven forth;But may resisted be, reduced to what it’s worth.So long as thou shalt fuel pile upon that flame,Canst thou expect the fire will die away and tame?So soon as fuel is withheld, a fire goes out;Through piety is lust brought down, and put to rout.Shall that sweet face e’er blacken through sin’s dismal smoke,That’s brightened by such sheen as virtue must invoke? 
A conflagration raged in days of great ‘Umer,210   Stones were devoured therein, as firewood in the air. The buildings it consumed, and left whole households waste;The nests and nestlings were destroyed; — last trump’s foretaste.One half Medīna fell a prey to ruthless flame,Whereat th’ aqueous element might well feel shame.Whole cisterns were exhausted in the combat wild;And vinegar was added. Hope was thus beguiled.The fire grew fiercer under stimulus of strife;Extension gave it wings, success infused new life. 
The people now came flocking to the Caliph’s gate,215   In marvel, that, through water, fire would not abate. 
He told them that the fire burnt by divine command;That all those flames arose from their too frugal hand:“What use are water, vinegar? Distribute bread;Eschew cold avarice, if by me you’ll be led.”They answered: “Wide our doors stand open every day,We’ve ever lavish been; almsgiving is our play.” 
‘Umer replied: “In form and custom, bread you’ve given.But not from love of God. You’re hands to dole were driven.‘T was pride and ostentation led to your display;Not charity, not pity, sense of duty, say.   220Your riches are your seed. Cast not such seed to waste.Place not a sword in robber’s hand with senseless haste.Distinction make ‘twilit friend and foe to truth divine;Seek out God’s saints, and leave them not to starve, to pine.You’ve spent your stuff upon your cherished kindred sole,And fancied stupidly you’d followed God’s law whole.” 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XVI. ‘Alī’s Forbearance 
FROM ‘Alī may we learn sincerity of meeds.“God’s Lion” we may hold free from all gross misdeeds.In fight he’d conquered one who’d earned a hero’s crown.His sword he’d swiftly raised, his victim to hew down.That champion spat in ‘Alī’s face, to mark disdain;The face of one, the Prophet’s pride, all saints’ chieftain.He spat upon a face to which the moon bowed low,And offered adoration in the temple’s show. 
That instant ‘Alī dropped his sword, high poised in air,5   And left the spitter harmless; — action debonnair.This raised the foe’s astonishment; called forth his awe.That pardon, that forgiveness, grew not from war’s law. 
He said to ‘Alī: “Thou thy sword hadst raised to slay.Why hast thou dropt it now, — prolonged my forfeit day?What hast thou seen, surpassing prowess of my arm,That thus thou hast repented, — left me free from harm?What may it be has calmed the fury of thy breast,Which as the lightning gleamed, and, straightway sank to rest?What didst thou see, that, by reflection on me cast,10   A spark has leapt to life in my despairing breast?What was thy vision, far above the world of fact,Than life far sweeter, whence my life receives new pact? 
For bravery, ‘God’s Lion’ art thou justly named.For kindness, I now know, thou art too little famed.For generosity, thou’rt Moses’ cloud divine,From which poured forth the quails and manna, as from mine!” 
The clouds rain wheat. Man, then, by labour and by skill,Reduces this to food, when finely ground in mill.But Moses’ cloud, more generous far, with open hand,Sent down in plenty food prepared, by God’s command.   15For them who ate at Providence’s table, free,God’s mercy was displayed; — a banner all could see.For forty years that daily bread — abounding grace — Failed not. Fond expectation’s utmost stretch took place.But satisfaction followed not. The thankless crewDemanded “leeks and onions;” as of old they knew. 
Ye who are Ahmed’s people, graced beyond compare,Are promised spiritual blessings till last judgment’s blare.Whoever says, at heart: “My trust is in the Lord,” God’s promise: “Him I’ll feed,” will find a faithful word.   20Without a twist accept this promise, as is meet;You’ll find it in your mouth as milk and honey sweet.To twist a term, and so deny gift’s incidence,Is to invent a cloak to change the word’s true sense.To think th’ expression’s wrong sad weakness shows of mind;Wisdom divine’s a kernel; human reason, rind.Twist then thyself; change not the sense of words divine;Conceive thy nose at fault; chide not the sweet woodbine. 
O ‘Alī! Thou who mind and eye entirely art!Relate a little of the knowledge in thy heart.   25Thy calmness is a sword that cleaves our minds in twain;The fountain of thy wisdom makes us whole again. 
Speak out! I know these mysteries are Jehovah’s own;To kill without a sword’s a power of God well known.He is Creator, without limbs and without tools;The Giver of all blessings, copious as sea’s pools.How many kinds of wine are savoured by our souls,While eye and ear perceive not whence the wave that rolls! 
Pray tell us, ‘Alī, — falcon, soaring in heaven’s heights, — 30   What didst thou see that instant, to forego thy rights?Thy eyes have learnt to catch seraphic visions’ gleam;Around thee, all unconscious are, as in a dream.Thou seest the moon, all brightly shining in the sky;We see but darkness, clouds above us seem to fly.Thou seest three moons together, shining bright, out-spread;While three of us are scarcely sure one’s overhead.All three have eyes and ears fixed on thee, in suspense,In keenest expectation. I’m stone of offence. 
“Is this a spell to witch the eyes? Is it the truth?35   To me thou art a wolf; I’m Joseph to thee, sooth.Though worlds there may be, eighteen thousand globes, and more;Not every eye has power to witness all their store.Disclose thy secret, ‘Alī, — God’s own ‘Chosen One!’ How many ‘judges’ errors’ work God’s will alone!Pray tell me what, just now, has been revealed to thee;Or I’ll disclose the vision I’ve been made to see.If thou the secret keep, I will declare its sense,Moon-like, on me thy knowledge shines, with light intense.But if the moon’s bright disk break forth from ‘neath the cloud,40   Poor midnight travellers safely, then, pursue their road. 
They then are safe from error, risk no wandering vain;Protection of the moonlight shields from terror’s chain.The mutely-teaching promptings of the silvery moon,If couched in words, would homewards guide us doubly soon.” 
Thou art “the Gate;” the Prophet, “Science’ City” is, Thou art the ray that beams from lustrous sun of his.Then open, Gate I Unfold thyself to those who seek!Let rind of science overgrow their minds, all meek.Stand open, Gate! Thou portal of God’s mercy sure!Thy court’s the court of Him “who hath no peer,” secure!   45True, every breath and atom’s watching to get in.But if kept closed, who’d say there is a gate to win?Unless the Keeper open wide the portal’s wing,No soul would dream an entry were an easy thing.E’en when the gate is opened, lo! surprise is felt.Hope and desire are scared; each suitor’s heart must melt.As one who finds a treasure in a ruined maze,Seeks evermore for ruins; — treasures are his craze.Unless a man receive a pearl from beggar’s hand,He’ll never venture pearls from beggars to demand.   50For years, should mere opinion wander up and down,It never will outpass the rents of its torn gown.Until a fragrance strike thy nostrils from above,Thou’lt follow thy own nose, but never meet thy love. 
Thus spake that new-converted warrior in surprise;Expressing wonder, such as words may symbolise.Then. added: “O! Command, of Faithful Church thou Prince. That as a babe a spirit new I may evince.” 
The planets seven o’er every unborn babe keep watch,55   Each for a stated period, ere its birth’s despatch.When life’s infused into the nascent atom’s form,The sun takes charge, as watcher o’er the feeble worm.The babe its life derives from Sol’s all-quickening rays.That radiant orb’s the fount of life’s all-wondrous ways.The other planets help to modify its limbs;Each, when the sun has life infused, then onward climbs.What is the channel of connection with the sun,Discovered in the womb by fœtus ere’t can run?Deep-hidden from our senses, many an occult road60   Leads to the sun in heaven, and needs nor whip, nor goad.One road, by which gold draws its nutriment from thence;Another, whence the ruby’s colour grows intense.A road, by which the garnet gathers igneous glow;A path, pursued by lightning to the horseshoe low.A channel, through which fruits their ripeness draw, select;A track, for wit to flow, and senseless form inject. 
“Declare, thou falcon, with thy glistening plumage, bright,Our chief’s companion, on his gauntlet sitting, light; — Make known, thou phœnix-hunting bird of prey, — 65   Thou conqueror of foes, — sole, — clear of troops’ array.A nation in its millions, one sole man art thou.Speak! Speak! I cast myself upon thy mercy now!Instead of anger, what has moved thee to relent, — To proffer to a foe forgiveness transcendent?” 
To him made ‘Alī answer: “For the truth I fight.God’s servant am I. Slave I’m not to fleshly might.‘God’s lion’ I’ve been named; not ‘Ravening Wolf of Lust;’My actions are the proof my faith is in the Just.God is the Archer. I’m His bow; — and arrow, too.70   He is the Smiter. I’m the weapon; — sword, bamboo. 
‘Thou castedst not, when stones thou castedst in the fight.’ God is the Warrior mighty. I’m dust in His sight.Thought of myself I’ve banished, wholly, from my path.Save God, all else as naught I hold; — a mower’s swath.I’m but a shadow; shadow cast by Sun of Truth.Door-keeper am I; — veil, I’m not, to hide His sooth.I’m a sword. My trenchancy’s union with God.In battle, life I give. I slay not whom’s downtrod.Blood does not soil the blade I wield in righteous cause;Nor gusts of passion raise a craving for applause.   75A straw I’m not. A mountain am I; — firm, staid, fast.No whirlwind can remove me with its tearing blast.’Tis sticks and straws, alone, are driven by the storm.Their nature is to move; — to every breath conform.The gust of anger, breath of lust, and blast of greed, — Each agitates the man not anchored in Truth’s creed.Firm mountain am I. God it is that firmness gives.Were I a straw, His whirlwind is the force that drives.A breath from God alone has power to move my soul.My love for God’s the motive o’er me has control.   80Their anger rules e’en kings. My anger is my slave.My wrath I’ve bridled; — bitted; — leave, it aye must crave.My anger’s stifled by reflection’s strong embrace.God’s wrath to me’s a message of His pardoning grace.My roof’s a ruin, true; but light pours through the rent.I’m dust. But from my soil flowers blow, and yield sweet scent. 
“Just cause if I perceive, with foes when waging war,I make no scruple, but my sword from blood debar.For God’s sake do I love. Such is my fame with men.My hate’s in Truth’s sole cause. I’m raging lion then.   85My generosity springs all from love of God.For God’s sake, too, I’m parsimonious as clod. 
I’m avarice, munificence, to one sole end.I’m God’s in all things. To myself I ne’er attend.That which I do, for God’s sake flows; not from schedule.’Tis not a guess, an inference;— ’tis sight’s safe rule.I’ve no occasion to investigate, to seek.God’s prompting’s what I follow, docile, meek. 
“Is soaring my vocation? Heaven’s my pinions’ goal.90   Do I revolve? My centre’s fixed in highest shoal.If load I carry, I well know where this is due.I’m but a moon; a Sun before me gives the cue.I’ve no desire for converse with material things.An ocean flows not from a meadow brook’s scant springs.I frame discourse to suit the feeble minds of men.This system has no fault; it met our Prophet’s ken. 
“I’m free from prejudice; accept a free man’s oath.Against one free man, crowds of slaves possess no truth.By law, in canon of Islām, the word of slaves95   No value has, as evidence; — the chain depraves.Ten thousand slaves may witness bear in court of law;Their testimony weighs not in the scales one straw.The slave to passion bondsman is, in sight of God.He’s lower than the captive ‘neath taskmaster’s rod.A slave may be enfranchised by his owner’s word;Lust’s victim, though freeborn, dies bound with strongest cord.The slave to passion cannot loose his heavy chain.God’s mercy, special grace, can set him free again.He’s fallen into a pit, unfathomed, bottomless.100   His own sin this. Compulsion ’tis not, fate, nor cess.Into a pit he’s cast himself, for which my mindCannot imagine sounding-line, its depth to find. 
“It’s useless to continue further in this strain.Not hearts alone, but rocks, may weep at folly’s train. 
If men’s hearts break not, ’tis that they are harder still,Through carelessness, preoccupation, sloth, ill-will.They’ll break and bleed one day, when tears will not avail.Be contrite, then, before repentance’ sighs must fail.Since slavish testimony’s not accepted there,His word alone is valid who from lust is clear.   105The Lord’s Commissioned One’s a valid witness. See!Because, from all eternity, from slavery’s stain he’s free.I, too, am free. Wrath cannot bind my soul with chains.God’s attributes, alone, have power to rule my brains. 
“Come in, thou. Grace of God hath set thy spirit free.A flint thou wert. Rich pearl henceforward shalt thou be.Thou’rt plucked from blasphemy’s vast thorny desert sands.A flowering shrub henceforth in faith’s rich garden lands.Thou art become myself; I, thee; beloved friend!Thou’rt ‘Alī. Can I ‘Alī slay? May heaven forfend!   110Thy past transgression rank’s as highest virtue’s deed.In twinkling of an eye heaven’s bounds thou. mayest out-speed. 
“How blest is the transgression pardoned of the Lord!The rose, from thorny stem, He calls forth at a word!Remember ‘Umer’s guilt, — his murderous design Against the Prophet! This brought him to faith benign.Was’t not to practise magic Pharaoh called his priests?The grace of God converted them to saints from beasts.Had they not been magicians, he not obstinate,They’d ne’er been made assemble, truth excogitate.   115How would they e’er have seen the staff, the miracles?Your sin proved your conversion, reprehensibles! 
“The Lord can far remove our state of deep despair,Our sin can change to righteousness; foulness to fair.God can our worst offences purge away, make clean;Imputing virtue to us, spite of vice’s mien.For this is Satan chased away with igneous bolts; His proud inflation bursts in twain, from envy’s jolts.He strives to multiply the direful load of sin,120   That, under its dead weight, he man in hell may pin.And when he finds unrighteousness as service told,His torment is redoubled, heartache twenty-fold. 
“Come in! A door I’ve opened for thy entrance, wide.Thou spattest on me. I reply with favour’s tide.On him who injured me I benefits bestow; My head I lay before the feet of friends, below;Thou mayest conceive what gifts I hold in store for them,My faithful servants; — treasures, thrones, and diadem.I’m such a man that whoso strives to shed my blood125   Forgiven is, and overwhelmed with favour’s flood.The Prophet quiet notice whispered to my slave,The day would come when he to take my life would crave.Me, also, he informed, through revelation’s voice,That I should die, smote by a hand of my own choice.That servant begged and prayed for instant death’s release,So he’d be spared from sin so heinous, — love’s decease.But I replied: ‘Since ’tis decreed that by thy handMy life be ta’en, why should I seek a countermand?’Before me prone he fell, this prayer he warmly made:130   ‘Hew me in twain! For love of God, let me persuade!Pray save me from so vile, so villainous, a fate.Remorse for ever as its prey will hold my hate.’ 
“Again I firmly answered him, — decidedly:‘No counsel will avail. Pen’s mark must needs apply. 
I bear no grudge against thee in my inmost soul;I hold thee not responsible for deed so foul.Thou’rt but the instrument, ’tis God that strikes the blow!How can I chide His instrument, — His arrow’s bow?’ 
“He asked: ‘Why, then, this sentence sternly passed on me?’My answer was: ‘God knows the germ of His decree!   135Should He find fault with what results from His resolve,From reprehension’s self He can a heaven evolve.He hath a right to take exception to His deed.He’s Lord of grace. But Lord of wrath, also. Take heedHe’s Prince of all within this sphere of new events.He’s Arbiter of all; — of kingdoms, as of tents.If He see fit to break the weapon of His will,The broken tool still hastens His word to fulfil. 
“The mystery of His word: ‘We abrogate, annul,’ Remember, straight is followed by: ‘We better cull.”   140Whatever law the Lord hath abrogated yet,Is but a weed plucked up; — a rose blooms where ’twas set.The night He promulgates; day’s work refrains from act.Consider! Mind becomes like inorganic fact.Again, night disappears; the light of day is spread;And nature shows its marvels; reason wakes from dead.With darkness comes the sleep that locks our reason fast,But spirits know not darkness; life’s stream still goes past.Is’t not that mind’s refreshed in darkest hours of night?Its silence ’tis gives birth to every voice of light.”   145 
By contraries are contraries brought forth to view,From out of darkness was the light created new.The Prophet’s wars have brought about the peace that reigns;These tranquil latter days the fruits are of his pains. 
How many heads lay low beneath that hero’s blows,That peace might be enjoyed by faith’s true yoke-fellows! 
’Tis thus the gardener prunes away the surplus twigs,That fruitful boughs may prosper, yield their loads of figs.Sagacity roots out all weeds from cultured space.150   The orchard, thence, new vigour finds, and blooms apace.A wise physician will extract a tooth decayed,To give relief front pain to his beloved maid. 
How much increase grows out of decrease here below.The martyr gains eternal life by death in show.Man, fed by bread, cuts down the harvest corn when ripe;“Partakes the blessing joyfully,” with drum and pipe.When brutes are slaughtered with due sense of wisdom’s law,Man’s life is nurtured; — learning, science, vigour draw.If man be slaughtered, see what woes from thence arise.155   Compare the two; — their difference you’ll recognise. 
The vegetable world lives by God’s sun and rain,God’s care takes charge of it. His care is not in vain.The slaughtered beasts have food and drink as well as those.They die, because they’ve throats. Those have no life to lose. 
Withhold thy hand in season, man of little sense!That so thy food suffice. Thy life’s thy recompense.Thou art as fruitless as the barren willow-branch,Because thy honour’s sacrificed mere bread to scranch.If thy brute nature will not practise abstinence,160   Administer the remedy. Bring it to sense. 
If thou wouldst cleanse thy garments — free them from all soil, — Despise not thou the bleacher, nor his useful toil.If greed of food have fractured abstinence in thee;Lay hold on Him who fractures heals. From self get free.No sooner shall the fracture be by Him fast bound,New union will take place, — the broken part grow sound.If thou hadst made the fracture, it would thee inviteTo make it whole again, — the sundered bones unite.Thou canst not? Thence we see, the right is His to breakWho can unite the fractured limb — make strong whatever’s weak.   165Who knows to mend hath privilege a cloth to tear.Who knows to sell, to buy hath also learnt, ’tis clear.He may disturb a house, and turn it upside down,Who can arrange it better than the whole wide town.If God destroy one creature in His boundless might,By thousands He creates, and brings again to light. 
Had He not set a punishment for each offence,Or had not said: “Lex talionis is life’s fence,” Who’d had audacity, of his own will,To put to death a man who should another kill?   170He knows each creature by His power endued with sight.And He’s aware a slayer does but work His might.If His command be set on mortal’s head to slay, — Albeit his own child, — he must the word obey.Go! Stand in fear! Blame not, too much, the bad!Know, thou art equally a slave with him who’s mad! 
The eye of Adam fell upon a demon foul,Him viewed with proud disdain, with haughty scowl.His self-esteem, his egotistic pride him drove,With smile sarcastical, the cursed imp to reprove.   175 
God’s wrath was roused. He him addressed: “Ho! Adam! Ho!Hast thou no insight into mysteries of woe?If I tear fiercely off a hide from heels to head,A mountain I can also wrench from its firm stead.A hundred Adams of their fig-leaves I can strip;A thousand demons into true believers whip.” 
In terms contrite and meek was Adam’s answer couched:“Forgive, Lord God! I stand reproved! My fault’s avouched!Henceforth, I vow, I never will repeat such fault.180   Repentance I profess. Do Thou forego assault.” 
O Answerer of prayer! In mercy guide us right!Our knowledge, as our riches, null is in Thy sight!Lead not astray a heart enlightened by Thy grace! Turn from us every evil threatening to take place! Reprieve our souls from judgment merited, severe!Repel us not from out the fold of saints, sincere!More bitter is there naught than severance from Thee.Without Thy shelter, naught but anguish can we see.Our minds’ accomplishments impede our hearts’ advance.185   Our flesh the deadly enemy that wrecks our souls’ best chance.Our hands, like robbers, seize on all our feet may earn.Unless Thou prove our refuge, life’s not worth concern.If we perchance escape with life from danger’s snares.Our fears and anguish make it prey to carking cares.Should not our souls in union be with Thee, O Lord,Eternal tears our eyes will blind, and mad discord.A way shouldst Thou not open, lost must be our souls.Without Thy presence, life is death; — all smiles are scowls. 
Shouldst Thou find fault with service rendered unto Thee,Thy chiding’s merited, no doubt; as all may see.   190If Thou be discontented with the sun and moon,Or if Thou call the cypress “hunchback,” “macaroon,”Or if Thou say the skies and spheres are all too low,Or find the mines, the seas, a paltry puppet-show,All this, compared with Thy perfections, is the truth.Thine is the kingdom; Thine the power to mend all ruth.Thou art removed from danger, as from nullity.To non-existences Thou givest being. Why? 
He who makes all things grow, can make them wither, too.For He can all repair, as He can ruin woo.   195Each autumn, vegetation dwindles by His will;Again ’tis He calls forth the flowers in dale, on hill.His voice is heard: “Come forth, ye withered ones, anew;Once more put on your beauty, — charm each mortal’s view.” 
Narcissus’ eye was blinded; lo! its twinkle’s seen.The reed, that down was mowed, becomes sweet music’s queen.We are but creatures. To create we have no power.Our weakness we confess. Contentment’s our best dower.We’re things of flesh. The flesh to vanity unites.Unless Thou call us, we become rebellious sprites.   200From Satan we escape, because Thou’st paid a price;And bought our souls, to set us free from vice. 
Thou art the Guide of all who live upon the earth.Without his staff and guide, what is a blind man worth?Besides Thee, all that’s goodly, all that shocks our sense,Is fatal unto man, — consuming fire intense.If any seek the fire, to make thereof a shield,A Magian he becomes, of Zoroaster’s yield. 
All else besides the Lord is vain, and of no worth.205   The mercies of our God, a bounteous rain, poured forth. 
Now turn again to ‘Alī and his destined foe.His great forbearance contemplate; this wretch’s woe.He made remark: “My murderer’s before my eyes,All day and night. No anger towards him in me lies.Death is to me as sweet as life; — as my own self;My death and resurrection, two sides of one shelf.A deathless death’s a welcome change to loving heart;A lifeless life has been its present counterpart.” 
Death to appearance, life is, — in the main;210   Externally a loss; — intrinsically, gain.Within its mother’s womb a child’s lot is to roam.It has to blossom in the world, as ocean’s foam.I have a wish, a longing, towards the world of doom;But God forbids: “Cast not your lives away,” in gloom. All prohibition’s but a bar from what is loved;No prohibition’s needed from a thing reproved.A grain with bitter kernel, still more bitter rind,Full prohibition carries in itself, we find. 
The fruit of death is savoury, in my esteem.215   Nay more. “The slain do live” a blessed text must seem. Then slay me, O my trusty friends, without reproach.My death is life eternal. Let it, then, approach.In death I’ll find my love. My dearest friends, adieu!How long shall I be barred from darling interview?Unless our separation be from one we mourn,Why should we say: “Forsooth, to Him we shall return?” ’Tis only he returns, who comes back to his home.Our true return’s from severance to union’s dome. 
That servant once again appealed and begged: “‘Alī!Put me to death, that sin so heinous I may flee!   220My life’s at thy behest; forthwith pour out my blood!So shall my soul escape the burden of crime’s brood.” 
Then ‘Alī answered: “Should each sun-mote take a knife,Or sword draw, with design to sacrifice thy life,One single hair’s-breadth could they not, yet, take effect,Since Providence decrees ’tis thou must work that act.But sorrow not! Thy intercessor I will be!Lord of my soul am I; — not slave to fleshly fee.My body frail no value has now in my sight;From flesh when liberated shall my soul feel light.   225The dagger and the sword may take root in my limbs.Death’s but a banquet; wounds, a flower that graceful climbs.” 
Now, who can thus despise his body in his heart,And yet feel greed for empire, or for pontiff’s part?He strove, ’tis evident, upon the judgment seat,To set a good example to all future great;To breathe a righteous spirit into monarchs’ breasts;Make sure that goodly fruit come from their deeds and gests. 
The Prophet’s high endeavour, Mekka to subdue,Had no foundation in a lust for revenue.   230He had refused the treasures of the lofty spheres;On day of trial shut his heart to hopes and fears.To catch a glimpse of him the blest angelic trainHad crowded heaven’s bounds full as they could contain;In dainty guise, to honour him themselves arrayed;He took no note. On God alone his thoughts were stayed.His heart was filled with sense of his great Maker’s grace.The angels, or the prophets, there could find no place. 
He said: “I’m he whose eyes swerved not; “no crow, I! See! 235   “The Limner is my love; from juice of vine I’m free.” The treasures of “the spheres,” their “animating souls,”As rubbish were accounted, driven by breeze that rolls.What, then, would Mekka weigh, — the Persian, Syrian lands,That he should covet them, spoil make them for his bands?Suspicion such as this springs from a jaundiced mind.It judges by itself; — all, tinged as self must find. 
Green spectacles who sets upon his foolish nose,To view the sun, will find him green, we must suppose.Take off the spectacles, the source of colour’s tinge,240   He straightway sees aright. Now, nature’s hues impinge.A horseman had stirred up the dust in clouds, not faint.A distant looker-on supposed the dust a saint.Thus Satan saw a dust; and cried: “This son of earthExcites in me much envy, hatred, malice, wrath.” 
If thou, too, so observe God’s saints with envy’s eyes,Be sure thy vision’s tainted. Satan’s hatching lies.Thou obstinate! Art not one of that hell-hound’s sons?Then, whence this heritage of hate’s foul orisons?“I am no hound, God’s Lion am I. God I love.245   I’m ‘Lion of the Truth.’ Mere form I aye reprove.”A lion of the world may hunt for prey and spoil.A lion of eternity, death’s freedom from turmoil.In death he sees a hundred thousand modes of life.So, mothlike, death he courts; his candle, murderer’s knife. 
To court grim death’s a collar round the true man’s neck.This was the text proposed, that wrought recusant’s wreck.God’s word revealed hath said: “O men of human race!Death to the faithful is a blessing, and a grace.” A love of gain is innate in the human breast.To court death’s doubtless profit, is to wish the best.   230Then, O ye stiff-necked people, do, for honour’s sake,The wish for speedy death upon your tongues’ ends take. 
No recusant was found who dared to lisp that prayer,When thus Muhammed put it as the truth’s assayer.He knew that should they venture that ordeal to prove,In all the world no recusant would thenceforth move.They all preferred to pay their tribute for their lives,And begged: “O lamp of truth, destroy us not, our wives!” 
How many more examples could be pointed out!But, if thou seest the truth, give me thy hand. Quit doubt.   255Forsake thy dunghill. Enter our abode of bliss.From darkness thee to guide, a light shines o’er th’ abyss.Shake off all hesitation. Enter heaven’s gate.Avoid the pit that’s bottomless! Be not too late! 
The Prince of all Believers thus addressed that chief,In tones serenest: “Know, that in our contest brief,When thou didst spit upon me, giving scorn its vent,My choler was aroused; — to wreck my patience went.Half warmed with zeal for God, half stirred with anger’s fire,Unholy partnership was formed ‘twixt truth and ire.   260 
Thou wast designed and fashioned by a hand divine.To God dost thou belong; — no creature art of mine.Defacement of God’s work should be by God’s decree;To break God’s pitcher, man a stone of God should see.” 
The Magian heard. The light flashed on his heart and soul.The clouds of misbelief, as fog, away did roll.He spake: “The seed of wrongfulness is what I’ve sown.Thou’rt altogether different from what I’ve known.Thou art a balance, with an equitable soul;265   Or rather, index art thou, of just balance-bowl.Thou art become my kith and kin, — my brother true;Thou art a ray to light the path I shall pursue.The slave I have become of that fair Source of light,From whence thou hast derived the beam that charms my sight.The slave of every billow of that glorious Sea,That casts such pearls ashore, as I admire in thee.Teach me to formulate the motto of thy creed;For, henceforth thou’rt my guide, of whom I stand in need.” 
Full fifty of his household, — of his stock and race,270   With zealous love the noble law of Islām did embrace.Thus ’twas, the hero, by decisive wisdom’s stroke,Averted death from many, slavery’s fetters broke.The sword of wisdom’s sharper than the finest steel;Its words more efficacious than an army’s wheel. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XVII. Conclusion 
Alas! By one poor morsel, tasted through a sin,The fount of thought’s congealed; heart’s blood diluted thin.One grain of wheat has cast eclipse o’er sun of mind,As “dragon’s tail” doth dull the full moon, when inclined. Behold. How delicate is thought! One mite of clay,From full-moon glory, it reduced to disarray.The bread of life, received, digested, gives man power.Material bread excites distrusts, contentions, sour. 
The thorn, while green, cropped by the camel, far from fords,Not only pleasure gives, but nutriment affords.   5That selfsame thorn, grown dry and void of juicy sap,If ventured on by starving beast in desert gap,His palate and his lips will puncture, blood make flow;As if conserve of roses should with daggers glow. 
The word of life’s the green, the tender, juicy thorn.Material become, it’s dry, as hard as horn.And thou, poor flesh, expectant of the living word,Bitest at the word material, dreaming not of sword; — Snappest at the hard, unyielding dictum, with fond zest;And findest it horny, flinty, irksome to digest.   10 
It has become a stone. It wounds; it draws forth blood.Then shun it, human camel. Seek it not for food.Words are most foully mixed with troubling thoughts of earth.The water’s muddy. Close the spring whence it comes forth.Until the Lord, again, shall make it clear and sweet; — Shall purify the inky stream, as He deems meet, — Shall patience add to wish, — not haste and oversight, — 14   Wait thou contentedly. God best knows what is right. 
THE END 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





EDWARD HENRY WHINFIELD 1898 TRANSLATION
 





Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





CONTENTS 
BOOK I.
PROLOGUE.
STORY I. The Prince and the Handmaid.
STORY II. The Oilman and his Parrot.
STORY III. A Tyrannical Jewish King, his Minister (Vazir), and the Christians
STORY IV. Another Tyrannical Jewish King.
STORY V. The Lion and the Beasts.
STORY VI. Omar and the Ambassador.
STORY VII. The Merchant and his Clever Parrot.
STORY VIII. The Harper.
STORY IX. The Arab and his Wife.
STORY X. The Man who was Tattooed.
STORY XI. The Lion who Hunted with the Wolf and the Fox.
STORY XII. Joseph a‚Žd the Mirror.
STORY XIII. The Prophet’s Scribe.
STORY XIV. The Chinese and the Greek Artists.
STORY XV. Counsels of Reserve given by the Prophet to his Freedman Zaid.
STORY XVI. ‘Ali’s Forbearance.
Epilogue to Book I.
BOOK II.
PROLOGUE.
STORY I. The Sufi’s Beast
STORY II. The Pauper and the Prisoners.
STORY III. The King and his Two Slaves.
STORY IV. The Falcon and the Owls.
STORY V. The Thirsty Man who threw Bricks into the Water.
STORY VI. Luqman’s Master examines him and discovers his Acuteness.
STORY VII. Moses and the Shepherd.
STORY VIII. The Man who made a Pet of a Bear.
STORY IX. The Gardener and the Three Friends.
STORY X. Bayazid and the Saint.
STORY XI. Mo’avia and Iblis.
STORY XII. The Four Hindustanis who censured one another.
STORY XIII. The Old Man and the Physician.
STORY XIV. The Arab Carrier and the Scholar.
STORY XV. The Man who boasted that God did not punish him for his sins, and Jethro’s answer to him.
STORY XVI. The Gluttonous Sufi.
STORY XVII. The Tree of Life.
STORY XVIII. The Young Ducks who were brought up under a Hen.
BOOK III.
STORY I. The Travelers who ate the Young Elephant.
STORY II. The Villager who invited the Townsman to visit him.
STORY III. The Jackal who pretended to be a Peacock.
STORY IV. Moses and Pharaoh.
STORY V. The Elephant in a Dark Room.
STORY VI. The Lover who read Sonnets to his Mistress.
STORY VII. The Man who prayed earnestly to be fed without work.
STORY VIII. The Boys and their Teacher.
STORY IX. The Darvesh who Broke his Vow.
STORY X. The Old Man who made no Lamentation at the Death of his Sons.
STORY XI. Bahlol and the Darvesh.
STORY XII. The Visions seen by the Saint Daquqi.
STORY XIII. The People of Saba.
STORY XIV. Miracles performed by the Prophet Muhammad.
STORY XV. The Man who asked Moses to teach him the language of animals.
STORY XVI. The Woman who lost all her infants.
STORY XVII. The Vakil of the Prince of Bokhara.
STORY XVIII. The Deadly Mosque.
BOOK IV.
STORY I. The Lover and his Mistress.
STORY II. The Building of the “Most Remote Temple” at Jerusalem.
STORY III. The Youth who wrote a letter of complaint about his rations to the King.
STORY IV. Bayazid and his impious sayings when beside himself.
STORY V. The Three Fishes.
STORY VI. Moses and Pharaoh.
STORY VII. The Courtier who quarreled with his Friend for saving his Life.
STORY VIII. The Prince who, after having been beguiled by a Courtesan, returned to his True Love.
STORY IX. The Mule and the Camel.
BOOK V.
STORY I. The Prophet and his Infidel Guest.
STORY II. The Arab and his Dog.
STORY III. The Sage and the Peacock.
STORY IV. Muhammad Khwarazm Shah and the Rafizis of Sabzawar.
STORY V. The Man who claimed to be a Prophet.
STORY VI. The Disciple who blindly imitated his Shaikh.
STORY VII. How Adam was created out of a handful of earth brought by an Angel.
STORY VIII. Mahmud and Ayaz.
STORY IX. The sincere repentance of Nasuh.
STORY X. The Lion, the Fox, and the Ass.
STORY XI. The Mosalman who tried to convert a Magian.
STORY XII. The Devotee who broke the noble’s wine-jar.
STORY XIII. (continued). Mahmud and Ayaz.
BOOK VI.
PROLOGUE.
STORY I. The Hindu Slave who loved his Master’s Daughter.
STORY II. The Fowler and the Bird.
STORY III. The Drunken Turkish Amir and the Minstrel.
STORY IV. The Purchase of Bilal.
STORY V. The Sufi and the Qazi.
STORY VI. The Faqir and the Hidden Treasure.
STORY VII. The Three Travelers.
STORY VIII. The Man who received a Pension from the Prefect of Tabriz.
STORY IX. The King and his Three Sons.
 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





BOOK I. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





PROLOGUE. 
HEARKEN to the reed-flute, how it complains,Lamenting its banishment from its home:“Ever since they tore me from my osier bed,My plaintive notes have moved men and women to tears.I burst my breast, striving to give vent to sighs,And to express the pangs of my yearning for my home.He who abides far away from his homeIs ever longing for the day he shall return.My wailing is heard in every throng,In concert with them that rejoice and them that weep.Each interprets my notes in harmony with his own feelings,But not one fathoms the secrets of my heart.My secrets are not alien from my plaintive notes,Yet they are not manifest to the sensual eye and ear.Body is not veiled from soul, neither soul from body,Yet no man hath ever seen a soul.”This plaint of the flute is fire, not mere air.Let him who lacks this fire be accounted dead!’Tis the fire of love that inspires the flute,l’Tis the ferment of love that possesses the wine.The flute is the confidant of all unhappy lovers;Yea, its strains lay bare my inmost secrets.Who hath seen a poison and an antidote like the flute?Who hath seen a sympathetic consoler like the flute?The flute tells the tale of love’s bloodstained path,It recounts the story of Majnun’s love toils.None is privy to these feelings save one distracted,As ear inclines to the whispers of the tongue.Through grief my days are as labor and sorrow,My days move on, hand in hand with anguish.Yet,, though my days vanish thus, ’tis no matter,Do thou abide, O Incomparable Pure One! 2But all who are not fishes are soon tired of water;And they who lack daily bread find the day very long;So the “Raw” comprehend not the state of the “Ripe;” 3Therefore it behoves me to shorten my discourse.Arise, O son! burst thy bonds and be free!How long wilt thou be captive to silver and gold?Though thou pour the ocean into thy pitcher,It can hold no more than one day’s store.The pitcher of the desire of the covetous never fills,The oyster-shell fills not with pearls till it is content;Only he whose garment is rent by the violence of loveIs wholly pure from covetousness and sin.Hail to thee, then, O LOVE, sweet madness!Thou who healest all our infirmities!Who art the physician of our pride and self-conceit!Who art our Plato and our Galen!Love exalts our earthly bodies to heaven,And makes the very hills to dance with joy!O Iover, ’twas love that gave life to Mount Sinai, 4When “it quaked, and Moses fell down in a swoon.”Did my Beloved only touch me with his lips,I too, like the flute, would burst out in melody.But he who is parted from them that speak his tongue,Though he possess a hundred voices, is perforce dumb.When the rose has faded and the garden is withered,The song of the nightingale is no longer to be heard.The BELOVED is all in all, the lover only veils Him; 5The BELOVED is all that lives, the lover a dead thing.When the lover feels no longer LOVE’s quickening,He becomes like a bird who has lost its wings. Alas!How can I retain my senses about me,When the BELOVED shows not the light of His countenance?LOVE desires that this secret should be revealed,For if a mirror reflects not, of what use is it?Knowest thou why thy mirror reflects not?Because the rust has not been scoured from its face.If it were purified from all rust and defilement,It would reflect the shining of the SUN Of GOD.6O friends, ye have now heard this tale,Which sets forth the very essence of my case. 
NOTES: 
Love signifies the strong attraction that draws all creatures back to reunion with their Creator.2. Self-annihilation leads to eternal life in God the universal Noumenon, by whom all phenomena subsist. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 400.3. “Raw” and “Ripe” are terms for “Men of externals” and “Men of heart” or Mystics.4. Alluding to the giving of the law on Mount Sinai. Koran vii. 139.5. All phenomenal existences (man included) are but “veils” obscuring the face of the Divine Noumenon, the only real existence, and the moment His sustaining presence is withdrawn they at once relapse into their original nothingness. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 165.6. So Bernard of Clairvaux. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 435. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY I. The Prince and the Handmaid. 
A prince, while engaged on a hunting excursion, espied a fair maiden, and by promises of gold induced her to accompany him. After a time she fell sick, and the prince had her tended by divers physicians. As, however, they all omitted to say, “God willing,1 we will cure her,” their treatment was of no avail. So the prince offered prayer, and in answer thereto a physician was sent from heaven. He at once condemned his predecessors’ view of the case, and by a very skilful diagnosis, discovered that the real cause of the maiden’s illness was her love for a certain goldRumi of Samarcand. In accordance with the physician’s advice, the prince sent to Samarcand and fetched the goldRumi, and married him to the lovesick maiden, and for six months the pair lived together in the utmost harmony and happiness. At the end of that period the physician, by divine command, gave the goldRumi a poisonous draught, which caused his strength and beauty to decay, and he then lost favour with the maiden, and she was reunited to the king. This Divine command was precisely similar to God’s command to Abraham to slay his son Ishmael, and to the act of the angel in slaying the servant of Moses,2 and is therefore beyond human criticism.Description of Love. 
A true lover is proved such by his pain of heart;No sickness is there like sickness of heart.The lover’s ailment is different from all ailments;Love is the astrolabe of God’s mysteries.A lover may hanker after this love or that love,But at the last he is drawn to the KING of love.However much we describe and explain love,When we fall in love we are ashamed of our words.Explanation by the tongue makes most things clear,But love unexplained is clearer.When pen hasted to write,On reaching the subject of love it split in twain.When the discourse touched on the matter of love,Pen was broken and paper torn.In explaining it Reason sticks fast, as an ass in mire;Naught but Love itself can explain love and lovers!None but the sun can display the sun,If you would see it displayed, turn not away from it.Shadows, indeed, may indicate the sun’s presence,But only the sun displays the light of life.Shadows induce slumber, like evening talks,But when the sun arises the “moon is split asunder.” 3In the world there is naught so wondrous as the sun,But the Sun of the soul sets not and has no yesterday.Though the material sun is unique and single,We can conceive similar suns like to it.But the Sun of the soul, beyond this firmament,No like thereof is seen in concrete or abstract.4Where is there room in conception for His essence,So that similitudes of HIM should be conceivable?Shamsu-’d-Din of Tabriz importunes Jalalu-’d-Dinto compose the Masnavi.The sun (Shams) of Tabriz is a perfect light,A sun, yea, one of the beams of God!When the praise was heard of the “Sun of Tabriz,”The sun of the fourth heaven bowed its head.Now that I have mentioned his name, it is but rightTo set forth some indications of his beneficence.That precious Soul caught my skirt,Smelling the perfume of the garment of Yusuf;And said, “For the sake of our ancient friendship,Tell forth a hint of those sweet states of ecstasy,That earth and heaven may be rejoiced,And also Reason and Spirit, a hundredfold.”I said, “O thou who art far from ‘ The Friend,’Like a sick man who has strayed from his physician,Importune me not, for I am beside myself;My understanding is gone, I cannot sing praises.Whatsoever one says, whose reason is thus astray,Let him not boast; his efforts are useless.Whatever he says is not to the point,And is clearly inapt and wide of the mark.What can I say when not a nerve of mine is sensible?Can I explain ‘The Friend’ to one to whom He is no Friend?Verily my singing His praise were dispraise,For ’twould prove me existent, and existence is error.5Can I describe my separation and my bleeding heart?Nay, put off this matter till another season.”He said, “ Feed me, for I am an hungered,And at once, for ‘the time is a sharp sword.’O comrade, the Sufi is ‘the son of time present.’ 6It is not the rule of his canon to say, ‘To-morrow.’Can it be that thou art not a true Sufi?Ready money is lost by giving credit.”I said, “’Tis best to veil the secrets of ‘The Friend.’So give good heed to the morals of these stories.That is better than that the secrets of ‘The Friend’Should be noised abroad in the talk of strangers.”He said, “Without veil or covering or deception,Speak out, and vex me not, O man of many words!Strip off the veil and speak out, for do not IEnter under the same coverlet as the Beloved?”I said, “If the Beloved were exposed to outward view,Neither wouldst thou endure, nor embrace, nor form.Press thy suit, yet with moderation;A blade of grass cannot, pierce a mountain.If the sun that illumines the worldWere to draw nigher, the world would be consumed.7Close thy mouth and shut the eyes of this matter,That, the world’s life be not made a bleeding heart.No longer seek this peril, this bloodshed;Hereafter impose silence on the ‘Sun of Tabriz.’”He said, “Thy words are endless. Now tell forthAll thy story from its beginning.” 
NOTES: 
As enjoined in Koran xviii. 23. One cannot converse with a strict Mosalman for five minutes without hearing the formula, “In sha Allah Ta’alla,” or D. V.2. Koran xviii. 73.3. Koran liv. I.4. There is a tradition, “I know my Lord by my Lord.”5. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 400. In the state of union self remains not.6. The Sufi is the “son of the time present,” because he is an Energumen, or passive instrument moved by the divine impulse of the moment. “The time present is a sharp sword,” because the divine impulse of the moment dominates the Energumen, and executes its decrees sharply. See Sohravardi quoted in Notices et Extraits des MSS., xii. 371 note.7. “When its Lord appears in glory to the Mount of existence, Existence is laid low, like the dust of the road.” Gulshan i Raz, I. 195. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY II. The Oilman and his Parrot. 
An oilman possessed a parrot which used to amuse him with its agreeable prattle, and to watch his shop when he went out. One day, when the parrot was alone in the shop, a cat upset one of the oil-jars. When the oilman returned home he thought that the parrot had done this mischief, and in his anger he smote the parrot such a blow on the head as made all its feathers drop off, and so stunned it that it lost the power of speech for several days. But one day the parrot saw a bald-headed man passing the shop, and recovering its speech, it cried out, “Pray, whose oil-jar did you upset?” The passers-by smiled at the parrot’s mistake in confounding baldness caused by age with the loss of its own feathers due to a blow. 
Confusion of saints with hypocrites.Worldly senses are the ladder of earth,Spiritual senses are the ladder of heaven.The health of the former is sought of the leech,The health of the latter from “The Friend.”The health of the former arises from tending the body,That of the latter from mortifying the flesh.The kingly soul lays waste the body,And after its destruction he builds it anew.Happy the soul who for love of GodHas lavished family, wealth, and goods!Has destroyed its house to find the hidden treasure,And with that treasure has rebuilt it in fairer sort;Has dammed up the stream and cleansed the channel,And then turned a fresh stream into. the channel;Has cut its flesh to extract a spear-head,1Causing a fresh skin to grow again over the wound;Has razed the fort to oust, the infidel in possession,And then rebuilt it with a hundred towers and bulwarks.Who can describe the unique work of Grace?I have been forced to illustrate it by these similes.Sometimes it presents one appearance, sometimes another.Yea, the affair of religion is only bewilderment.Not, such as occurs when one turns one’s back on God,But such as when one is drowned and absorbed in Him.The latter has his face ever turned to God,The former’s face shows his undisciplined self-will.Watch the face of each one, regard it well,It may be by serving thou wilt recognize Truth’s face.As there are many demons with men’s faces,It is wrong to join hand with every one.When the fowler sounds his decoy whistle,That the birds may be beguiled by that snare,The birds hear that call simulating a bird’s call,And, descending from the air, find net and knife.So vile hypocrites steal the language of Darveshes,In order to beguile the simple with their trickery.The works of the righteous are light and heat,The works of the evil treachery and shamelessness.They make stuffed lions to scare the simple,They give the title of Muhammad to false Musailima.But Musailma retained the name of “Liar,”And Muhammad that of “Sublimest of beings.”That wine of God (the righteous) yields a perfume of musk;Other wine (the evil) is reserved for penalties and pains. 
NOTES: 
These are all figures and types of self-annihilation in order to the acquisition of eternal life in God. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY III. A Tyrannical Jewish King, his Minister (Vazir), and the Christians 
A certain Jewish king used to persecute the Christians, desiring to exterminate their faith. His Vazir persuaded him to try a stratagem, namely, to mutilate the Vazir himself, and expel him from his court, with the intent that he might take refuge with the Christians, and stir up mutual dissensions amongst them. The Vazir’s suggestion was adopted.1 He fled to the Christians, and found no difficulty in persuading them that he had been treated in that barbarous way on account of his attachment to the Christian faith. He soon gained complete influence over them, and was accepted as a saintly martyr and a divine teacher. Only a few discerning men divined his treachery ; the majority were all deluded by him. The Christians were divided into twelve legions, and at the head of each was a captain. To each of these captains the Vazir gave secretly a volume of religious directions, taking care to make the directions in each volume different from and contradictory to those in the others. One volume enjoined fasting, another charity, another faith, another works, and so on. Afterwards the Vazir withdrew into a cave, and refused to come out to instruct his disciples, in spite of all their entreaties. Calling the captains to him, he gave secret instructions to each to set himself up as his successor, and to be guided by the instructions in the volume secretly confided to him, and to slay all other claimants of the apostolic office. Having given these directions, he slew himself. In the event each captain set himself up as the Vazir’s successor, and the Christians were split up into many sects at enmity with one another, even as the Vazir had intended. But the malicious scheme did not, altogether succeed, as one faithful band cleaved to the name of “Ahmad,” mentioned in the Gospel,2 and were thus saved from sharing the ruin of the rest. 
The Vazir’s Teaching.Myriads of Christians flocked round him,One after another they assembled in his street.Then he would preach to them of mysteries,Mysteries of the Gospel, of stoles, of prayers.He would preach to them with eloquent wordsConcerning the words and acts of the Messiah.Outwardly he was a preacher of religious duties,But within a decoy call and a fowler’s snare.Therefore the followers of the Prophet (‘Isa)Were beguiled by the fraud of that demon soul.He mingled in his discourses many secret doctrinesConcerning devotion and sincerity of soul.He taught them to make a fair show of devotion,But to say of secret sins, “What do they matter?”Hair by hair and jot by jot they learned of himFraud of soul, as roses might learn of garlic.Hair-splitters and all their disciplesAre darkened by similar preaching and discourse.The Christians gave their hearts to him entirely,For the blind faith of the vulgar has no discernment.In their inmost breasts they planted love of him,And fancied him to be the Vicar of Christ;Yea, him, that one-eyed and cursed Dajjal! 3Save us. O God ! who art our only defender!O God, there are hundreds of snares and baits,And we are even as greedy and foolish birds;Every moment our feet are caught in a fresh snare ;Yea, each one of us, though he be a falcon or Simurgh!Thou dost release us every moment, and straightwayWe again fly into the snare, O Almighty One!Sleep of the body the soul’s awakening.Every night Thou freest our spirits from the bodyAnd its snare, making them pure as rased tablets.Every night spirits are released from this cage,And set free, neither lording it nor lorded over.At night prisoners are unaware of their prison,At night kings are unaware of their majesty.Then there is no thought or care for loss or gain,No regard to such an one or such an one.The state of the “Knower” is such as this, even when awake.God says,4 “Thou wouldst deem him awake though asleep,Sleeping to the affairs of the world, day and night,Like a pen in the directing hand of the writer.He who sees not the hand which effects the writingFancies the effect proceeds from the motion of the pen.If the “Knower” revealed the particulars of this state,’Twould rob the vulgar of their sensual sleep.His soul wanders in the desert that has no similitude;Like his body, his spirit is enjoying perfect rest;Freed from desire of eating and drinking,Like a bird escaped from cage and snare.But when he is again beguiled into the snare,He cries for help to the Almighty.Laila and the Khalifa.The Khalifa said to Laila, “Art thou really sheFor whom Majnun lost his head and went distracted?Thou art not fairer than many other fair ones.”She replied, “Be silent; thou art not Majnun!”If thou hadst Majnun’s eyes,The two worlds would be within thy view.Thou art in thy senses, but Majnun is beside himself.In love to be wide awake is treason.The more a man is awake, the more he sleeps (to love);His (critical) wakefulness is worse than slumbering.Our wakefulness fetters our spirits,Then our souls are a prey to divers whims,Thoughts of loss and gain and fears of misery.They retain not purity, nor dignity, nor lustre,Nor aspiration to soar heavenwards.That one is really sleeping who hankers after each whimAnd holds parley with each fancy.The twelve volumes of theology. 
He drew up a separate scroll to the address of each,The contents of each scroll of a different tenor;The rules of each of a different purport,This contradictory of that, from beginning to end.In one the road of fasting and asceticismWas made the pillar and condition of right devotion.In one ’twas said, “Abstinence profits not;Sincerity in this path is naught but charity.”In one ’twas said, “Thy fasting and thy charityAre both a making thyself equal with God;Save faith and utter resignation to God’s willIn weal and woe, all virtues are fraud and snares.”In one ’twas said, “Works are the one thing needful;The doctrine of faith without works is a delusion.”In one ’twas said, “Commands and prohibitions areNot for observance, but to demonstrate our weakness,That we may see our own weakness (to carry them out),And thereby recognize and confess God’s power.” 5In one ’twas said, “Reference to thine own weaknessIs ingratitude for God’s mercies towards us.Rather regard thy power, for thou hast power from God.Know thy power to be God’s grace, for ’tis of Him.”In one ’twas said, “Leave power and weakness alone;Whatever withdraws thine eyes from God is an idol.”In one ’twas said, “Quench not thy earthy torch,6That it may be a light to lighten mankind.If thou neglectest regard and care for it,Thou wilt quench at midnight the lamp of union.”In one ’twas said, “Quench that torch without fear,That in lieu of one thou may’st see a thousand joys,For by quenching the light the soul is rejoiced,And thy Laila is then as bold as her Majnun.Whoso to display his devotion renounces the world,The world is ever with him, before and behind.”In one ’twas said, “Whatsoever God has given theeIn His creation, that He has made sweet to thee;Yea, pleasant to thee and allowable. Take it, then,And cast not thyself into the pangs of abstinence.”In one ’twas said, “Give up all thou possessest,For to be ruled by covetousness is grievous sin.”(Ah! how many diverse roads are pointed out,And each followed by some sect for dear life!If the right road were easily attainable,Every Jew and Gueber would have hit on it!)In one ’twas said, “The right road is attainable,For the heart’s life is the food of the soul.Whatever is enjoyed by the carnal manYields no fruit, even as salt and waste land.Its result is naught but remorse,Its traffic yields only loss.It is not profitable in the long run;Its name is called ‘bankrupt’ in the upshot.Discern, then, the bankrupt from the profitable,Consider the eventual value of this and that.”In one ’twas said, “Choose ye a wise Director,But foresight of results is not found in dignities.”(Each sect looked to results in a different way,And so, perforce, became captive to errors.Real foresight of results is not simple jugglery,Otherwise all these differences would not have arisen.In one ’twas said, “Thyself art thy master,Inasmuch as thou art acquainted with the Master of all;Be a man, and not another man’s beast of burden!Follow thine own way and lose not thy head!”In one ’twas said, “All we see is One.Whoever says ’tis two is suffering from double vision.”In one ’twas said, “A hundred are even as one.”7But whoso thinks this is a. madman.Each scroll had its contrary piece of rhetoric,In form and substance utterly opposed to it;This contrary to that, from first to last,As if each was compounded of poison and antidotes. 
NOTES: 
Compare the story of Zopyrus, Herodotus, iii. 155.2. John xiv. 26: “But the Comforter (parakletos) shall teach you all things.” Mosalmans read periklytos, “praised” = Muhammad.3. Dajjal, i.e., Antichrist. Sale, Prelim. Discourse, .4. Said of the Seven Sleepers in the cave. Koran xviii. 17; “Knower” = the Gnostic who through ecstasy beholds divine verities.5. This was the doctrine of the Jabriyan or extreme predestinarians.6. i.e.. Hide not thy light (of good works or of self-denial) under a bushel.7. Alluding to the doctrine of the Trinity. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY IV. Another Tyrannical Jewish King. 
A certain Jewish king, the same who is referred to in the Sura “Signs of the Zodiac,” I made up his mind to utterly exterminate the Christian faith, and with that view he set up a huge idol, and issued commands that all who refused to worship it should be cast into the fire. Thereupon his officers seized a Christian woman with her babe, and as she refused to worship it, they cast the babe into the fire. But the babe cried out to its mother, “Be not afraid, the fire has no power to burn me; it is as cool as water!” Hearing this, the rest of the Christians leapt into the fire, and found that it did not burn them. The king reproached the fire for failing to do its office, but the fire replied that it was God’s servant, and that its consuming properties were not to be used for evil purposes. It then blazed up and consumed the king, and all his Jews with him. 
Second causes only operate in subordination to,and form the impulsion of, the First Cause.Air, earth, water, and fire are God’s servants.To us they seem lifeless, but to God living.In God’s presence fire ever waits to do its service,Like a submissive lover with no will of its own.When you strike steel on flint fire leaps forth;But ’tis by God’s command it thus steps forth.Strike not together the flint and steel of wrong,For the pair will generate more, like man and woman.The flint and steel are themselves causes, yetLook higher for the First Cause, O righteous man!For that Cause precedes this second cause.How can a cause exist of itself without precedent cause?That Cause makes this cause operative,And again helpless and inoperative.That Cause, which is a guiding light to the prophets,That, I say, is higher than these second causes.Men’s minds recognize these second causes,But only prophets perceive the action of the First Cause.Praise compared to vapour drawn upwards,and then descending in rain.Though water be enclosed in a reservoir,Yet air will absorb it, for ’tis its supporter;It sets it free and bears it to its source,Little by little, so that you see not the process.In like manner this breath of ours by degreesSteals away our souls from the prison-house of earth.“ The good word riseth up to Him,”2Rising from us whither He knoweth.Our breathings are lifted up in fear of God,Offerings from us to the throne of Eternity.Then come down to us rewards for our praises,The double thereof, yea, mercies from the King of Glory.Therefore are we constrained to utter these praisesThat slaves may attain the height of God’s gifts.And so this rising and descent go on evermore,And cease not forever and aye.To speak in plain Persian, this attractionComes from the same quarter whence comes this sweet savour.3 
NOTES: 
Koran lxxxv.2. Koran, xxxv. II.3. Sweet savour, i.e., the joy of heart experienced by the offerer of prayer when his prayer is accepted of God. See Book II. Story XVII. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY V. The Lion and the Beasts. 
In the book of Kalila and Damna a story is told of a lion who held all the beasts of the neighborhood in subjection, and was in the habit of making constant raids upon them, to take and kill such of them as he required for his daily food. At last the beasts took counsel together, and agreed to deliver up one of their company every day, to satisfy the lion’s hunger, if he, on his part, would cease to annoy them by his continual forays. The lion was at first unwilling to trust to their promise, remarking that he always preferred to rely on his own exertions; but the beasts succeeded in persuading him that he would do well to trust Providence and their word. To illustrate the thesis that human exertions are vain, they related a story of a man who got Solomon to transport him to Hindustan to escape the angel of death, but was smitten by the angel the moment he got there. Having carried their point, the beasts continued for some time to perform their engagement. One day it came to the turn of the hare to be delivered up as a victim to the lion; but he requested the others to let him practice a stratagem. They scoffed at him, asking how such silly beast as he could pretend to outwit the lion. The hare assured them that wisdom was of God, and God might choose weak things to confound the strong. At last they consented to let him try his luck. He took his way slowly to the lion, and found him sorely enraged. In excuse for his tardy arrival he represented that he and another hare had set out together to appear before the lion, but a strange lion had seized the second hare, and carried it off in spite of his remonstrances. On hearing this, the lion was exceeding wroth, and commanded the hare to show him the foe who had trespassed on his preserves. Pretending to be afraid, the hare got the lion to take him upon his back, and directed him to a well. On looking down the well, the lion saw in the water the reflection of himself and of the hare on his back; and thinking that he saw his foe with the stolen hare, he plunged in to attack him, and was drowned, while the hare sprang off his back and escaped. This folly on the part, of the lion was predestined to punish him for denying God’s ruling providence. So Adam, though he knew the names of all things, in accordance with God’s predestination, neglected to obey a single prohibition, and his disobedience cost him dearly. 
Trust in God, as opposed to human exertions.The beasts said, “O enlightened sage,Lay aside caution; it cannot help thee against destiny;To worry with precaution is toil and moil;Go, trust in Providence, trust is the better part.War not with the divine decree, O hot-headed one,Lest that decree enter into conflict with thee.Man should be as dead before the commands of GodLest a blow befall him from the Lord of all creatures.”He said, “True; but though trust be our mainstay,Yet the Prophet teaches us to have regard to means.The Prophet cried with a loud voice,‘Trust in God, yet tie the camel’s leg.’ lHear the adage, ‘The worker is the friend of God;’2Through trust in Providence neglect not to use means.Go, O Quietists, practice trust with self-exertion,Exert yourself to attain your objects, bit by bit.In order to succeed, strive and exert yourselves;If ye strive not for your objects, ye are fools.”They said, “What is gained from the poor by exertionsIs a fraudulent morsel that will bring ill luck.Again, know that self-exertion springs from weakness;Relying on other means is a blot upon perfect trust.Self-exertion is not more noble than trust in God.What is more lovely than committing oneself to God?Many there are who flee from one danger to a worse;Many flee from a snake and meet a dragon.Man plans a stratagem, and thereby snares himself;What he takes for life turns out, to be destruction.He shuts the door after his foe is in the house.After this sort were the schemes of Pharaoh.That jealous king slew a myriad babes,While Moses, whom he sought, was in his house.Our eyes are subject to many infirmities;Go! annihilate your sight in God’s sight.For our foresight His foresight is a fair exchange;In His sight is all that ye can desire.So long as a babe cannot grasp or run,It takes its father’s back for its carriage.But when it becomes independent and uses its hands,It falls into grievous troubles and disgrace.The souls of our first parents, even before their hands,Flew away from fidelity after vain pleasure.Being made captives by the command, ‘Get down hence,’ 3They became bond-slaves of enmity, lust, and vanity.We are the family of the Lord and His sucking babes.The Prophet said, ‘The people are God’s family;’He who sends forth the rain from heaven,Can He not also provide us our daily bread?”The lion said, “True; yet the Lord of creaturesSets a ladder before our feet.Step by step must we mount up to the roof!The notion of fatalism is groundless in this place.Ye have feet why then pretend ye are lame?Ye have hands why then conceal your claws?When a master places a spade in the hand of a slave,The slave knows his meaning without being told.Like this spade, our hands are our Master’s hints to us;Yea, if ye consider, they are His directions to us.When ye have taken to heart His hints,Ye will shape your life in reliance on their direction;Wherefore these hints disclose His intent,Take the burden from you, and appoint your work.He that bears it makes it bearable by you,He that is able makes it within your ability.Accept His command, and you will be able to execute it;Seek union with Him, and you will find yourselves united.Exertion is giving thanks for God’s blessings;Think ye that your fatalism gives such thanks?Giving thanks for blessings increases blessings,But fatalism snatches those blessings from your hands.Your fatalism is to sleep on the road; sleep notTill ye behold the gates of the King’s palace.Ah! sleep not, O unreflecting fatalists,Till ye have reached that fruit-laden Tree of LifeWhose branches are ever shaken by the wind,And whose fruit is showered on the sleepers’ heads.Fatalism means sleeping amidst highwaymen.Can a cock who crows too soon expect peace?If ye cavil at and accept not God’s hints,Though ye count yourselves men, see, ye are women.The quantum of reason ye possessed is lost,And the head whose reason has fled is a tail.Inasmuch as the unthankful are despicable,They are at last cast into the fiery pit.If ye really have trust in God, exert yourselves,And strive, in constant reliance on the Almighty.”Wisdom is granted often times to the weak.He said, “O friends, God has given me inspiration.Often times strong counsel is suggested to the weak.The wit taught by God to the beeIs withheld from the lion and the wild ass.It fills its cells with liquid sweets,For God opens the door of this knowledge to it.The skill taught by God to the silkwormIs a learning beyond the reach of the elephant.The earthly Adam was taught of God names, 4So that his glory reached the seventh heaven.He laid low the name and fame of the angels, 5Yet blind indeed are they whom God dooms to doubt!The devotee of seven hundred thousand years (Satan)Was made a muzzle for that yearling calf (Adam), 6Lest he should suck milk of the knowledge of faith,And soar on high even to the towers of heaven.The knowledge of men of external sense is a muzzleTo stop them sucking milk of that sublime knowledge.But God drops into the heart a single pearl-dropWhich is not bestowed on oceans or skies!”“How long regard ye mere form, O form-worshippers?Your souls, void of substance, rest still in forms.If the form of man were all that made man,Ahmad and Abu Jahl would be upon a par.A painting on a wall resembles a man,But see what it is lacking in that empty form.’Tis life that is lacking to that mere semblance of man.Go! seek for that pearl it never will find.The heads of earth’s lions were bowed downWhen God gave might to the Seven Sleepers’ dog. 7What mattered its despised formWhen its soul was drowned in the sea of light?”Human wisdom, the manifestation of divine.On his way to the lion the hare lingered,Devising a stratagem with himself.He proceeded on his way after delaying long,In order to have a secret or two for the lion.What worlds the principle of Reason embraces!How broad is this ocean of Reason!Yea, the Reason of man is a boundless ocean.O son, that ocean requires, as it were, a diver. 8On this fair ocean our human formsFloat about, like bowls on the surface of water;Yea like cups on the surface, till they are. filled;And when filled, these cups sink into the water.The ocean of Reason is not seen ; reasoning men are seen;But our forms (minds) are only as waves or spray thereof.Whatever form that ocean uses as its instrument,Therewith it casts its spray far and wide. 9Till the heart sees the Giver of the secret,Till it espies that Bowman shooting from afar,It fancies its own steed lost, while in bewildermentIt is urging that steed hither and thither; 10It fancies its own steed lost, when all the whileThat swift steed is bearing it on like the wind.In deep distress that blunder headRuns from door to door, searching and inquiring,“Who and where is he that hath stolen my steed?”They say, “What is this thou ridest on, O master?”He says, “True, ’tis a steed; but where is mine?”They say, “Look to thyself, O rider; thy steed is there.”The real Soul is lost to view, and seems far off; 11Thou art like a pitcher with full belly but dry lip;How canst thou ever see red, green, and scarletUnless thou seest the light first of all?When thy sight is dazzled by colors,These colors veil the light from thee.But when night veils those colors from thee,Thou seest that colors are seen only through light.As there is no seeing outward colors without light,So it is with the mental colors within.Outward colors arise from the light of sun and stars,And inward colors from the Light on high.The light that lights the eye is also the heart’s Light;The eye’s light proceeds from the Light of the heart.But the light that lights the heart is the Light of God,Which is distinct from the light of reason and sense.At night there is no light, and colors are not seen;Hence we know what light is by its opposite, darkness.At night no colors are visible, for light is lacking.How can color be the attribute of dark blackness?Looking on light is the same as looking on colors;Opposite shows up opposite, as a Frank a Negro.The opposite of light shows what is light,Hence colors too are known by their opposite.God created pain and grief for this purpose,To wit, to manifest happiness by its opposites. 12Hidden things are manifested by their opposites;But, as God has no opposite. He remains hidden.God’s light has no opposite in the range of creationWhereby it may be manifested to view.Perforce “Our eyes see not Him, though He sees us.” 13Behold this in the case of Moses and Mount Sinai. 14Discern form from substance, as lion from desert,Or as sound and speech from the thought they convey.The sound and speech arise from the thought;Thou knowest not where is the Ocean of thought;Yet when thou seest fair waves of speech,Thou knowest there is a glorious Ocean beneath them.When waves of thought arise from the Ocean of Wisdom,They assume the forms of sound and speech.These forms of speech are born and die again,These wa,ves cast themselves back into the Ocean.Form is born of That which is without form,And goes again, for, “Verily to Him do we return.” 15Wherefore to thee every moment come death and “return.”Mustafa saith, “The world endureth only a moment.”So, thought is an arrow shot by God into the air.How can it stay in the air? It returns to God.Every moment the world and we are renewed, 16Yet we are ignorant of this renewing forever and aye.Life, like a stream of water, is renewed and renewed,Though it wears the appearance of continuity in form.That seeming continuity arises from its swift renewal,As when a single spark of fire is whirled round swiftly. 17If a single spark be whirled round swiftly,It seems to the eye a continuous line of fire.This apparent extension, owing to the quick motion,Demonstrates the rapidity with which it is moved.If ye seek the deepest student of this mystery,Lo! ’tis Husamu-’d-Din, the most exalted of creatures! 
NOTES: 
“Trust in God and keep your powder dry.”2. “Laborare est orare.”3. Koran ii. 341.4. “And He taught Adam the names of all things” (Koran ii. 29).5. The angels said, “We have no knowledge but what thou hast given us to know” (Koran ii. 30).6. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 543.7. Koran xviii. 17.8. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 575: The ocean of Reason is the same as what is elsewhere called the ocean of Being, viz., the Noumenon, or Divine substratum of all phenomenal being and thought.9. “Those arrows were God’s, not vours” (Koran viii. 17); i.e., Man’s reason proceeds from God, the “Only Real Agent.”10. Alluding to the “Believer’s lost camel “ (Book II. Story XII., infra.). Men seek wisdom, and do not know that in themselves is the reflected wisdom of God (Gulshan i Raz, I. 435).11. The real Soul, i.e., the spirit which God “breathed into man” (Koran xv. 29). “In yourselves are signs; will ye not behold them?” (Koran li, 21).12. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 92. Mr. Mansel (Bampton Lectures, ) says: “A thing can be known as that which it is only by being distinguished from that which it is not.” But the Infinite Deity ex hypothesi includes all things; so there is nothing to contrast Him with.13. Koran vi. 103.14. Koran vii. 139: “He said, ‘Thou shalt not see me.’”15. Koran ii. 151.16. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 645: All phenomena are every moment renewed by fresh effluxes of being from the Divine Noumenon.17. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 710. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY VI. Omar and the Ambassador. 
The hare, having delivered his companions from the tyranny of the lion, in the manner just described, proceeds to improve the occasion by exhorting them to engage in a greater and more arduous warfare, viz., the struggle against their inward enemy, the lusts of the flesh. He illustrates his meaning by the story of an ambassador who was sent by the Emperor of Rum to the Khalifa ‘Omar. On approaching Medina this ambassador inquired for ‘Omar’s palace, and learned that ‘Omar dwelt in no material palace, but in a spiritual tabernacle, only visible to purified hearts. At last he discerned ‘Omar lying under a palm-tree, and drew near to him in fear and awe. ‘Omar received him kindly, and instructed him in the doctrine of the mystical union with God. The ambassador heard him gladly, and asked him two questions, first, How can souls descend from heaven to earth? and secondly, With what object are souls imprisoned in the bonds of flesh and blood? ‘Omar responded, and the ambassador accepted his teaching, and became a pure-hearted Sufi. The hare urged his companions to abjure lust and pride, and to go and do likewise. 
God’s agency reconciled with man’s freewill.The ambassador said, “O Commander of the faithful,How comes the soul down from above to earth?How can so noble a bird be confined in a cage?”He said, “God speaks words of power to souls,To things of naught, without eyes or ears,And at these words they all spring into motion;At His words of power these nothings arise quickly,And strong impulse urges them into existence.Again, He speaks other spells to these creatures,And swiftly drives them back again into Not-being.He speaks to the rose’s ear, and causes it to bloom;He speaks to the tulip, and makes it blossom.He speaks a spell to body, and it becomes soul;He speaks to the sun, and it becomes a fount of light.Again, in its ear He whispers a word of power,And its face is darkened as by a hundred eclipses.What is it that God says to the ear of earth,That it attends thereto and rests steadfast?What is it that Speaker says to the cloud,That it pours forth rain-water like a water-skin?Whosoever is bewildered by wavering will, lIn his ear hath God whispered His riddle,That He may bind him on the horns of a dilemma;For he says, ‘Shall I do this or its reverse?’Also from God comes the preference of one alternative;’Tis from God’s impulsion that man chooses one of the two.If you desire sanity in this embarrassment,Stuff not the ear of your mind with cotton.Take the cotton of evil suggestions from the mind’s ear, 2That the heavenly voice from above may enter it,That you may understand that riddle of His,That you may be cognisant of that open secret.Then the mind’s ear becomes the sensorium of inspiration;For what is this Divine voice but the inward voice? 3The spirit’s eye and ear possess this sense,The eye and ear of reason and sense lack it.The word ‘compulsion’ makes me impatient for love’s sake;’Tis he who loves not who is fettered by compulsion.This is close communion with God, not compulsion,The shining of the sun, and not a dark cloud.Or, if it be compulsion, ’tis not common compulsion,It is not the domination of wanton wilfulness.O son, they understand this compulsionFor whom God opens the eyes of the inner man.Things hidden and things future are plain to them;To speak of the past seems to them despicable.They possess freewill and compulsion besides, 4As in oyster-shells raindrops are pearls.Outside the shell they are raindrops, great and small;Inside they are precious pearls, big and little.These men also resemble the musk deer’s bag;Outside it is blood, but inside pure musk;Yet, say not that outside ’twas mere blood,Which on entering the bag becomes musk.Nor say that outside the alembic ’twas mere copper,And becomes gold inside, when mixed with elixir.In you freewill and compulsion are vain fancies,But in them they are the light of Almighty power.On the table bread is a mere lifeless thing,When taken into the body it is a life-giving spirit.This transmutation occurs not in the table’s heart,’Tis soul effects this transmutation with water of life.Such is the power of the soul, O man of right views!Then what is the power of the Soul of souls? (God).Bread is the food of the body, yet consider,How can it be the food of the soul, O son?Flesh-born man by force of soulCleaves mountains with tunnels and mines.The might of Ferhad’s soul cleft a hill;The might of the Soul’s soul cleaves the moon; 5If the heart opens the mouth of mystery’s store,The soul springs up swiftly to highest heaven.If tongue discourses of hidden mysteries,It kindles a fire that consumes the world.Behold, then, God’s action and man’s action;Know, action does belong to us ; this is evident.If no actions proceeded from men,How could you say, ‘Why act ye thus?’The agency of God is the cause of our action,Our actions are the signs of God’s agency;Nevertheless our actions are freely willed by us,Whence our recompense is either hell or ‘The Friend.’” 
NOTES: 
The poet’s insistence on the doctrine of God being the Fa’il i Hakiki, or Only Real Agent, without whose word no being and no action can be, leads him to the question of freewill and compulsion of man’s will (see Gulshan i Raz, I. 555).2. So Gulshan i Raz, I. 442.3. The leading principle of all mysticism is that, independently of sense and reason, man possesses an inward sense, or intuition, which conveys to him a knowledge of God by direct apprehension (see Gulshan i Raz. I. 431).4. Their wills are identified with God’s will, as in the case of the saint Daquqi (infra, Book III. Story XII.)5. As a sign of the last day (Koran liv. 1). 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY VII. The Merchant and his Clever Parrot. 
There was a certain merchant who kept a parrot in a cage. Being about to travel to Hindustan on business, he asked the parrot if he had any message to send to his kinsmen in that country, and the parrot desired him to tell them that he was kept confined in a cage. The merchant promised to deliver this message, and on reaching Hindustan, duly delivered it to the first flock of parrots he saw. On hearing it one of them at once fell down dead. The merchant was annoyed with his own parrot for having sent such a fatal message, and on his return home sharply rebuked his parrot for doing so. But the parrot no sooner heard the merchant’s tale than ho too fell down dead in his cage. The merchant, after lamenting his death, took his corpse out of the cage and threw it away; but, to his surprise, the corpse immediately recovered life, and flew away, explaining that the Hindustani parrot had only feigned death to suggest this way of escaping from confinement in a cage. 
Saints are preserved from all harm 1.As to a “man of heart,” he takes no hurt,Even though he should eat deadly poison.He who gains health from practicing abstinence is safe;The poor disciple is safe in the midst of fever.The prophet said, “O disciple, though you be bold,Yet enter not into conflict with every foe.”Within you is a Nimrod; enter not his fire;But if you must do so, first become an Abraham. 2If you are neither swimmer nor seaman,Cast not yourself into the sea out of self-conceit.A swimmer brings pearls from the deep sea;Yea, he plucks gain from the midst of perils.If the saint handles earth, it becomes gold;If a sinner handles gold, it turns to dust.Whereas the saint is well-pleasing to God,In his actions his hand is the hand of God.But the sinner’s hand is the hand of Satan and demons,Because he is ensnared in falsity and fraud.If folly meets him, he takes it for wisdom;Yea, the learning gained by the wicked is folly.Whatever a sick man eats is a source of sickness,But if a saint imbibe infidelity it becomes faith.Ah! footman who contendest with horsemen,Thou wilt not succeed in carrying the day!The jealousy of God 3.The whole world is jealous for this cause,That God surpasseth the world in jealousy.God is as a soul and the world as a body,And bodies derive their good and evil from souls.He to whom the sanctuary of true prayer is revealedDeems it shameful to turn back to mere formal religion.He who is master of the robes of a kingBrings shame on his lord by petty huckstering.He who is admitted to the king’s presence-chamberWould show disrespect by tarrying at the doorway.If the king grants him license to kiss his hand,He would err were he to kiss merely the king’s foot.Though to lay head at the king’s feet is due obeisance,In the case supposed it would be wrong to kiss the feet.The king’s jealousy would be kindled against himWho, after he had seen his face, preferred his mere perfume.God’s jealousy may be likened to a grain of wheat,But man’s jealousy is but empty chaff.For know ye that the source of jealousy is in God,And man’s jealousy is only an offshoot from God’s.But, let me now quit this subject, and make complaintOf the severity of That Fickle Fair One.Complaints of God’s harsh dealings with His adoring slaves.“Wherefore dost thou abandon thy creed and faith?What matters it if it be heathen or true?Why hast thou forsaken thy Beloved?What matters it if she be fair or ugly?” 4Let me then, I say, make complaintOf the severity of That Fickle Fair One.I cry, and my cries sound sweet in His ear;He requires from the two worlds cries and groans.How shall I not wail under His chastening hand?How shall I not be in the number of those bewitched by Him?How shall I be other than night without His day?Without the vision of His face that illumes the day?His bitters are very sweets to my soul,My sad heart is a lively sacrifice to my Beloved.I am enamoured of my own grief and pain,For it makes me well-pleasing to my peerless King.I use the dust of my grief as salve for my eyes,That my eyes, like seas, may teem with pearls.The tears which are shed because of His chasteningAre very pearls, though men deem them mere tears.’Tis “The Soul of souls” of whom I am making complaint;Yet I do not complain; I merely state my case.My heart says, “He has injured me,”But I laugh at these pretended injuries.Do me justice, O Thou who art the glory of the just,Who art the throne, and I the lintel of Thy door!But, in sober truth, where are throne and doorway?Where are “We” and “I?” There where our Beloved is!O Thou, who art exempt from “Us” and “Me,”Who pervadest the spirits of all men and women;When man and woman become one, Thou art that One!When their union is dissolved, lo! Thou abidest!Thou hast made these “Us” and “Me” for this purpose,To wit, to play chess with them by Thyself. 5When Thou shalt become one entity with “Us” and “You.”Then wilt Thou show true affection for these lovers.When these “We” and “Ye” shall all become one Soul,Then they will be lost and absorbed in the “Beloved.”These are plain truths. Come then, O Lord!Who art exalted above description and explanation!Is it possible for the bodily eye to behold Thee?Can mind of man conceive Thy frowns and Thy smiles?Are hearts, when bewitched by Thy smiles and frowns, 6In a fit state to see the vision of Thyself?When our hearts are bewitched by Thy smiles and frowns,Can we gain life from these two alternating states?The fertile garden of love, as it is boundless,Contains other fruits besides joy and sorrow.The true lover is exalted above these two states,He is fresh and green independently of autumn or spring!Pay tithe on Thy beauty, O Beauteous One!Tell forth the tale of the Beloved, every whit!For through coquetry His glancesAre still inflicting fresh wounds on my heart.I gave Him leave to shed my blood, if He willed it;I only said, “Is it right? “ and He forsook me.Why dost Thou flee from the cries of us on earth?Why pourest Thou sorrow on the heart of the sorrowful?O Thou who, as each new morn dawns from the east,Art seen uprising anew, like a bright fountain!What excuse makest Thou for Thy witcheries?O Thou whose lips are sweeter than sugar,Thou that ever renewest the life of this old world,Hear the cry of this lifeless body and heart!But, for God’s sake, leave off telling of the Rose;Tell of the Bulbul who is severed from his Rose.My ardour arises not from joy or grief,My sense mates not with illusion and fancy.My condition is different, for it is strange.Deny it not ! God is all-powerful.Argue not from the condition of common men,Stumble not at severity and at mercy.For mercy and severity, joy and sorrow, are transient,And transient things die; “God is heir of all.” 7“Tis dawn! O Protector and Asylum of the dawn!Make excuse for me to my lord Husamu-’d-Din!Thou makest excuses for c(Universal Reason and Soul; 8Soul of souls and Gem of life art Thou!The light of my dawn is a beam from Thy light,Shining in the morning draught of Thy protection!Since Thy gift keeps me, as it were, intoxicated,What is this spiritual wine that causes me this joy?Natural wine lacks the ferment in my breast,The spheres lag behind me in revolutions!Wine is intoxicated with me, not I with it!The world takes its being from me, not I from it!I am like bees, and earthly bodies like wax, 9I build up these bodies as with my own wax! 
NOTES: 
This is a comment on the saying of Faridu-’d-Din Attar, “Thou art a man of lusts, O fool! In dust eat blood! but if a man of heart eats poison, ’tis as honey.”2. See Koran xxi. 68, and Rodwell’s note.3. This is a comment on the Hadis, “Verily Sa’d is a jealous man, and I am more jealous than he, and God is more jealous than I, and of His jealousy He prohibits ‘All pollutions, both outward and inward.’” (Koran vi. 152.)4. This is a quotation from Hakim Sanai, and forms the text of the following discourse.5. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 140, and Omar Khayyam Quatr., 270.6. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 745: Frowns are the occultation of the Beloved by the veil of phenomena; smiles, the revelation of Absolute Being to its votaries. Sa’di (Gulistan, Book II. Story XI.) says: “The vision, of God to the pious consists of manifestation and occultation; He shows Himself, and again withdraws Himself from our sight.”7. Koran xv. 23.8. i.e., the Logos, and First Soul, upposed to be referred to in the text: “O men, fear your Lord, who hath created you from one Soul, and of him created his wife” (Koran iv. I). See Gulshan i Raz, I. 203.9. i.e., in his spiritual exaltation he feels himself as the Logos, where from tho whole material creation emanates. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY VIII. The Harper. 
In the time of the Khalifa ‘Omar there lived a harper, whose voice was as sweet as that of the angel Israfil, and who was in great request at all feasts. But he grew old, and his voice broke, and no one would employ him any longer. In despair he went to the burial-ground of Yathrub, and there played his harp to God, looking to Him for recompense. Having finished his melody he fell asleep, and dreamed he was in heaven. The same night a divine voice came to ‘Omar, directing him to go to the burial-ground, and relieve an old man whom he should find there. ‘Omar proceeded to the place, found the harper, and gave him money, promising him more when he should need it. The harper cast away his harp, saying that it had diverted him from God, and expressed great contrition for his past sins. ‘Omar then instructed him that his worldly journey was now over, and that he must not give way to contrition for the past, as he was now entered into the state of ecstasy and intoxication of union with God, and in this exalted state regard to past and future should be swept away. The harper acted on his instructions, and sang no more. 
Apology for applying the term “Bride” to God.Mustafa became beside himself at that sweet call,His prayer failed on “the night of the early morning halt.”He lifted not head from that blissful sleep,” 1So that his morning prayer was put off till noon.On that, his wedding night, in presence of his bride,His pure soul attained to kiss her hands.Love and mistress are both veiled and hidden,Impute it not as a fault if I call Him “Bride.”I would have kept silence from fear of my Beloved,If He had granted me but a moment’s respite.But He said, “Speak on, ’tis no fault,’Tis naught but the necessary result of the hidden decree,’Tis a fault only to him who only sees faults.How can the Pure Hidden Spirit notice faults?”Faults seem so to ignorant creatures,Not in the sight of the Lord of Benignity.Blasphemy even may be wisdom in the Creator’s si ht,Whereas from our point of view it is grievous sin.If one fault occur among a hundred beauties’Tis as one dry stick in a garden of green herbs.Both weigh equally in the scalesFor the two resemble body and soul.Wherefore the sages have said not idly,“ The bodies of the righteous are as pure souls.”Their words, their actions, their praises,Are all as a pure soul without spot or blemish.‘Omar rebukes the Harper for brooding overand bewailing the past.Then ‘Omar said to him, “This wailing of thineShows thou art still in a state of ‘ sobriety.”’Afterwards he thus urged him to quit that stateAnd called him out of his beggary to absorption in God:“Sobriety savours of memory of the past;Past and future are what veil God from our sight.Burn up both of them with fire! How longWilt thou be partitioned by these segments as a reed?So long as a reed has partitions ’tis not privy to secrets,Nor is it vocal in response to lip and breathing.While circumambulating the house thou art a stranger;When thou enterest in thou art at home.Thou whose knowledge is ignorance of the Giver of knowledge,Thy wailing contrition is worse than thy sin.The road of the ‘annihilated’ is another road;Sobriety is wrong, and a straying from that other road.O thou who seekest to be contrite for the past,How wilt thou be contrite for this contrition?At one time thou adorest the music of the lute,At another embracest wailing and weeping.”While the “Discerner” reflected these mysteries,The heart of the harper was emancipated.Like a soul he was freed from weeping and rejoicing,His old life died, and he was regenerated.Amazement fell upon him at that moment,For he was exalted above earth and heaven,An uplifting of the heart surpassing all uplifting;I cannot describe it ; if you can, say on!Ecstasy and words beyond all ecstatic words;Immersion in the glory of the Lord of glory!Immersion wherefrom was no extrication,As it were identification with the Very Ocean!Partial Reason is as naught to Universal Reason,If one impulse dependent on another impulse be naught;But when that impulse moves this impulse,The waves of that sea rise to this point; 2 
NOTES: 
The night of his marriage with Safiyya.2. i.e., he is possessed by the Deity as an “Energumen,” and the Deity works these ecstatic states in him. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY IX. The Arab and his Wife. 
An Arab lived with his wife in the desert in extreme poverty, so that they became a reproach to their neighbours. The wife at last lost patience, and began to abuse her husband, and to urge him to improve their condition. The Arab rebuked her for her covetousness, reminding her that the Prophet had said, “Poverty is my glory,” and showing her how poverty was a better preparation for death than riches, and finally threatening to divorce her if she persisted in her querulous ways. The wife, however, by blandishments reduced her husband to obedience, as wives always do, and made him promise to carry out her wishes. She directed him to go and represent their case to the Khalifa at Bagdad, and to make him an offering of a pot of water, that being the only present they could afford to make. Accordingly the Arab travelled to Bagdad, and laid his offering at the feet of the Khalifa, who received it graciously, and in return filled the pot with pieces of gold, and then sent him back to his home in a boat up the river Tigris. The Arab was lost in wonder at the benignity of the Khalifa, who had recompensed him so bountifully for his petty offering of a drop of water. The story contains several digressions, on Pharaoh, on the prophet Salih, and on Adam and the angels, and the poet, apropos of its disconnectedness, compares it to eternity, as it has no beginning and no end. 
Men subdued by women’s wiles.In this manner she pleaded with gentle coaxing,The while her tears fell upon her cheeks.How could his firmness and endurance abideWhen even without tears she could charm his heart?That rain brought forth a flash of lightningWhich kindled a spark in the heart of that poor man.Since the man was the slave of her fair face,How was it when she stooped to slavish entreaties?When she whose airs set thy heart a-quaking,When she weeps, how feelest thou then?When she whose coquetry makes thy heart bleedCondescends to entreaties, how is it then?She who subdues us with her pride and severity,What plea is left us when she begins to plead?When she who traded in naught but bloodshedSubmits at last, ah! what a profit she makes!God has adorned them “fair in the sight of men;” 1From her whom God has adorned how can man escape?Since He created him “to dwell together with her,” 2How can Adam sever himself from his Eve?Though he be Rustum, son of Zal, and braver than Hamza,Yet he is submissive to the behests of his dame.He by whose preaching the world was entrancedWas he who spake the two words, “O Humaira!” 3Though water prevails over fire in might,Yet it boils by fire when in a cauldron.When the cauldron intervenes between these two,Air (desire) makes as naught the action of the water.Apparently thou art the ruler of thy wife, like water;In reality thou art ruled by and suppliant to her.Such is the peculiarity of man,He cannot withstand animal desire; that is his failing.The Prophet said that women hold dominionOver sages and over men of heart,But that fools, again, hold the upper hand over women,Because fools are violent and exceedingly froward.They have no tenderness or gentleness or amity,Because the animal nature sways their temperament.Love and tenderness are qualities of humanity,Passion and lust are qualities of animality.Woman is a ray of God, not a mere mistress,The Creator’s self, as it were, not a mere creature!Moses and Pharaoh, alike doers of God’s will,as Light and Darkness. Poison and Antidote.Verily, both Moses and Pharaoh walked in the right way,Though seemingly the one did so, and the other not.By day Moses wept before God,At midnight Pharaoh lifted up his cry,Saying, “What a yoke is this upon my neck, O God!Were it not for this yoke who would boast, ‘I am ?’Because Thou hast made Moses’ face bright as the moon,And hast made the moon of my face black in the face.Can my star ever shine brighter than the moon?If it be eclipsed, what remedy have I?Though princes and kings beat drums,And men beat cymbals because of my eclipse, 4They beat their brass dishes and raise a clamour,And make my moon ashamed thereby,I, who am Pharaoh, woe is me! The people’s clamourConfounds my boast, ‘I am Lord Supreme!’ 5Moses and I are Thy nurslings both alike,Yet Thy axe cuts down tho branches in Thy woods.Some of these branches Thou plantest in the ground,Others Thou castest away as useless.Can branch strive against axe? Not so.Can branch elude the power of the axe? Nay,O Lord of the power that dwells in Thy axe,In mercy make these crooked things straight!”Man and wife types of the spirit and the flesh.The dissension of this husband and wife is a parable;They are types of thy animal and rational souls.This husband and wife are the reason and the flesh,A couple joined together for good and for evil.And in this earthly house this linked pairDay and night are ever at variance and strife.The wife is ever seeking dainties for domestic needs,Namely, bread and meat and her own dignity and position.Like the wife, the animal soul seeks comfort,Sometimes carnal, sometimes ambitious;Reason has no care for these matters,In its mind is naught but regard to Allah.Though the secret moral hereof is a bait and snare,Hear its outward form to the end.If spiritual manifestations had been sufficient,The creation of the world had been needless and vain.If spiritual thought were equivalent to love of God,Outward forms of temples and prayers would not exist.Presents which friends make one to anotherAre naught but signs and indications,To give outward testimony and witnessOf the love concealed within the heart.Because outward attentions are evidenceOf secret love, O beloved!The witness may be true or false,Now drunk with real wine, now with sour whey;He who drinks fermented whey displays drunkenness,Makes a noise, and reels to and fro.That hypocrite in prayers and fastsDisplays exceeding diligence,That men may think him drunk with love of God;But if you look into the truth, he is drowned in hypocrisy.In fine, outward actions are guidesTo show the way to what is concealed within.Sometimes the guide is true, sometimes false,Sometimes a help, and at other times a hindrance.O Lord, grant, in answer to my prayers, discernment,That I may know such false signs from the true!Know you how discernment accrues to the sense?’Tis when sense “sees by the light of Allah.”If effects are obscure, still causes testify;Kindred, for instance, shows that there is love.But he to whom God’s light is the guideIs no longer a slave to effects and causes.When the light of Allah illumes his senses,A man is no longer a slave to effects.When love of God kindles a flame in the inward man,He burns, and is freed from effects.He has no need of signs to assure him of love,For love casts its own light up to heaven.Other details are wanting to complete this subject,But take this much, and all hail to you!Though reality is exposed to view in this form,Form is at once nigh to and far from reality.For instance, these two resemble water and a tree;When you look to their essence they are far apart;Yet see how quickly a seed becomes a high treeOut of water, along with earth and sunshine!If you turn your eyes to their real essence,These two are far, far apart from each other!But let us quit this talk of essences and properties,And return to the story of those two wealth-seekers.How God made Adam superior to the Angelsin wisdom and honour.He said, “By Allah, who knoweth hidden secrets,Who created pure Adam out of dust;In the form, three cubits high, which he gave him,He displayed the contents of all spirits, all decrees!Communicated to him the indelible tablet of existence, 6That he might know all that is written on those tablets,All that should be first and last to endless eternityHe taught him, with the knowledge of his own ‘names,’ 7So that the angels were beside themselves at his instruction,And gained more sanctity from his sanctification.The expansion of their minds, which Adam brought about,Was a thing unequalled by the expansion of the heavens.For the wide expanse of that pure mindThe wide space of the seven heavens was not enough.”The Prophet said that God has declared,“I am not contained in aught above or below,I am not contained in earth or sky, or evenIn highest heaven. Know this for a surety. O beloved!Yet am I contained in the believer’s heart!If ye seek me, search in such hearts!”He said also, “Enter the hearts of my servants 8To gain the paradise of beholding Me, O fearer of God.”Highest heaven, with all its light and wide expanse,When it beheld Adam, was shaken from its place!Highest heaven is greatness itself revealed;But what is form when reality draws nigh?Every angel declared, “In times of yoreWe bore friendship to the plains of earth;We were wont to sow the seed of service on the earth,Wherefore we bore a wondrous attachment to it.What was this attachment to that house of earthWhen our own natures are heavenly?What was the friendship of lights like us to darkness?How can light dwell together with darkness?O Adam! that friendship arose from the scent of thee,Because the earth is the warp and weft of thy body.Thy earthly body was taken from there,Thy pure spirit of light was shed down from here!But our souls were enlightened by thy spirit 9Long, long before earth had diverted it to itself.We used to be on earth, ignorant of tho earth,Ignorant of the treasure buried within it.When we were commanded to depart from that place,We felt sorrow at turning our steps away from it.So that we raised many questions, saying,‘ O Lord! who will come to take our place?Wilt Thou barter the glory of our praises and homageFor the vain babble (of men)?’The commands of God then diffused joy upon us; He said,‘What are ye saying at such length?What ye give tongue to so foolishlyIs as the words of spoiled children to their father.I knew of myself what ye thought,But I desired that ye should speak it;As this boasting of yours is very improper,So shall my mercy be shown to prevail over my wrath:O angels, in order to show forth that prevailing,I inspired that pretension to cavil and doubt;If you say your say, and I forbear to punish you,The gainsayers of my mercy must hold their peace.My mercy equals that of a hundred fathers and mothers;Every soul that is born is amazed thereat.Their mercy is as the foam of the sea of my mercy;It is mere foam of waves, but the sea abides ever!What more shall I say? In that earthly shellThere is naught but foam of foam of foam of foam!’”God is that foam; God is also that pure sea,For His words are neither a temptation nor a vain boast.Plurality and Partial Evil, though seeminglyopposed to Unity, subserve Good.The story is now concluded, with its ups and downs,Like lovers’ musings, without beginning or ending.It has no beginning, even as eternity,Nor ending, for ’tis akin to world without end.Or like water, each drop whereof is at onceBeginning and end, and also has no beginning or end.But God forbid! This story is not a vain fable,’Tis the ready money of your state and mine, be sure!Before every Sufi who is enlightenedWhatever is past is never mentioned.When his whole thoughts are absorbed in present ecstasy,No thought of consequences enters his mind. l0Arab, water-pot, and angels are all ourselves!“Whatsoever turneth from God is turned from Him.” 11Know the husband is reason, the wife lust and greed;She is vested with darkness and a gainsayer of reason.Learn now whence springs the root of this circumstance,From this, that the Whole has parts of divers kinds.These parts of the Whole are not parts in relation to it,Not in the way that rose’s scent is a part of the rose.The beauty of the green shoot is part of the rose’s beauty,But the turtle-dove’s cooing is a part of that Bulbuls music.But if I engage in doubts and answers,How can I give water to thirsty souls?Yet, if you are perplexed by Whole and finite parts,Have patience, for c( patience is the key of joy.”Be abstinent, abstinent from vague thoughts,Since there are lions in that desert (of thoughts).Abstinence is the prince of medicines,As scratching only aggravates a scab.Abstinence is certainly the root of medicine;Practise abstinence, see how it invigorates thy soul!Accept this counsel and give ear thereto,That it may be to thee as an earring of gold!Nay, not a mere earring, but that thou mayest be a mine of gold,Or that thou mayest surpass moon and Pleiades.First, know creation is in various forms;Souls are as various as the letters from Alif to Ya.In this variety of letters there seems disorder,Though in fact they agree in an integral unity.In one aspect they are opposed, in another united;In one aspect capricious, in another serious.The day of judgment is the day of tho great review;Whoso is fair and enlightened longs for that review;Whoso, like a Hindoo, is black (with sin),The day of review will sound the knell of his disgrace.Since he has not a face like a sun,He desires only night like to a veil!If his thorn puts not forth a single rosebud,The spring in disclosing him is his foe.But he who is from head to foot a perfect rose or lily,To him spring brings rejoicing.The useless thorn desires the autumn,That autumn may associate itself with the garden;And hide the rose’s beauty and the thorn’s shame,That men may not see the bloom of the one and the other’s shame,That common stone and pure ruby may appear all as one.True, the Gardener knows the difference even in autumn,But the sight of One is better than the world’s sight.That One Person is Himself the world, as He is the sun,And every star in heaven is a part of the sun.That One Person is Himself the world, and the restAre all His dependents and parasites, O man!He is the perfect world, yet He is single;He holds in hand the writing of the whole of existence.Wherefore all forms and colours of beauty cry out,“ Good news! good news! Lo! the spring is at hand!”If the blossoms did not shine as bright helmets,How could the fruits display their globes?When the blossoms are shed the fruits come to a head,When tho body is destroyed the soul lifts up its head.The fruit is the substance, the blossom only its form,Blossom the good news, and fruit the promised boon.When the blossoms fall the fruit appears,When the former vanish the fruit is tasted.Till bread is broken, how can it serve as food?Till the grapes are crushed, how can they yield wine?Till citrons be pounded up with drugs,How can they afford healing to the sick? 
NOTES: 
Koran iii. 12.2. Koran iii. 189.3. Muhammad said these words to his wife, Ayisha.4. Compare the ancient custom of ringing bells to still thunder.5. Koran lxxix. 24. Pharaoh’s boast.6. The tablet on which God writes His eternal decrees.7. Koran ii. 29.8. Koran lxxxix. 29.9. The Logos, the first of created beings, was afterwards embodied in Adam, the “Perfect Man,” or Microcosm.10. He is the “son of the time present and instant,” as said above.11. Koran li. 9. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY X. The Man who was Tattooed. 
It was the custom of the men of Qazwin to have various devices tattooed upon their bodies. A certain coward went to the artist to have such a device tattooed on his back, and desired that it might be the figure of a lion. But when he felt the pricks of the needles he roared with pain, and said to the artist, “What part of the lion are you now painting?” The artist replied, “I am doing the tail.” The patient cried, “Never mind the tail; go on with another part.” The artist accordingly began in another part, but the patient again cried out and told him to try somewhere else. Wherever the artist applied his needles, the patient raised similar objections, till at last the artist dashed all his needles and pigments on the ground, and refused to proceed any further.The Prophet’s counsels to ‘Ali to follow the direction of the Pir or Spiritual Guide, and to endure his chastisements patiently. 
The Prophet said to ‘Ali, “O ‘Ali,Thou art the Lion of God, a hero most valiant;Yet confide not in thy lion-like valour,But seek refuge under the palm-trees of the ‘Truth.’Whoso takes obedience as his exemplarShares its proximity to the ineffable Presence.Do thou seek to draw near to Reason; let not thy heartRely, like others, on thy own virtue and piety.Come under the shadow of the Man of Reason, lThou canst not find it in the road of the traditionists.That man enjoys close proximity to Allah;Turn not away from obedience to him in any wise;For he makes the thorn a bed of roses,And gives sight to the eyes of the blind.His shadow on earth is as that of Mount Qaf,His spirit is as a Simurgh soaring on high.He lends aid to the slaves of the friends of God,And advances to high place them who seek him.Were I to tell his praises till the last day,My words would not be too many nor admit of curtailment,He is the sun of the spirit, not that of the sky,For from his light men and angels draw life.That sun is hidden in the form of a man,Understand me! Allah knows the truth.O ‘Ali, out of all forms of religious serviceChoose thou the shadow of that dear friend of God!Every man takes refuge in some form of service,And chooses for himself some asylum;Do thou seek refuge in the shadow of the wise man,That thou mayest escape thy fierce secret foes.Of all forms of service this is fittest for thee;Thou shalt surpass all who were before thee.Having chosen thy Director, be submissive to him,Even as Moses submitted to the commands of Khizr; 2Have patience with Khizr’s actions, O sincere one!Lest he say, ‘There is a partition between us.’Though he stave in thy boat, yet hold thy peace;Though he slay a young man, heave not a sigh.God declares his hand to be even as God’s hand,For He saith, ( The hand of God is over their hands.’ 3The hand of God impels him and gives him life;Nay, not life only, but an eternal soul.A friend is needed; travel not the road alone,Take not thy own way through this desert!Whoso travels this road aloneOnly does so by aid of the might of holy men.The hand of the Director is not weaker than theirs;His hand is none other than the grasp of Allah!If absent saints can confer such protection,Doubtless present saints are more powerful than absent.If such food be bestowed on the absent,What dainties may not the guest who is present expect?The courtier who attends in the presence of the kingIs served better than the stranger outside the gate.The difference between them is beyond calculation;One sees the light, the other on]y the veil.Strive to obtain entrance within,If thou wouldst not remain as a ring outside the door.Having chosen thy Director, be not weak of heart,Nor yet sluggish and lax as water and mud;But if thou takest umbrage at every rub,How wilt thou become a polished mirror?” 
NOTES: 
i.e., the Pir, or Perfect Shaikh, or Spiritual Director. So St. John of the Cross and St. Theresa enjoin obedience to the Director (Vaughan, xii. 122).2. See Koran xviii. 77 for the story of Moses and Khizr. It is also given in Parnell’s ‘Hermit.’3. Koran xlviii. 10. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY XI. The Lion who Hunted with the Wolf and the Fox. 
A lion took a wolf and a fox with him on a hunting excursion, and succeeded in catching a wild ox, an ibex, and a hare. He then directed the wolf to divide the prey. The wolf proposed to award the ox to the lion, the ibex to himself, and the hare to the fox. The lion was enraged with the wolf because he had presumed to talk of “I” and “Thou,” and “My share” and “Thy share” when it all belonged of right to the lion, and he slew the wolf with one blow of his paw. Then, turning to the fox, he ordered him to make the division. The fox, rendered wary by the fate of the wolf, replied that the whole should be the portion of the lion. The lion, pleased with his self-abnegation, gave it all up to him, saying, “Thou art no longer a fox, but myself.” 
Till man destroys “self” he is no true friend of God.Once a man came and knocked at the door of his friend.His friend said, “who art thou. O faithful one?”He said, “’Tis I.” He answered, “There is no admittance.There is no room for the ‘raw’ at my well-cooked feast.Naught but fire of separation and absenceCan cook the raw one and free him from hypocrisy!Since thy ‘self’ has not yet left thee,Thou must be burned in fiery flames.”The poor man went away, and for one whole yearJourneyed burning with grief for his friend’s absence.His heart burned till it was cooked; then he went againAnd drew near to the house of his friend.He knocked at the door in fear and trepidationLest some careless word might fall from his lips.His friend shouted, “Who is that at the door?”He answered, “’Tis Thou who art at the door. O Beloved!”The friend said, “Since ’tis I, let me come in,There is not room for two ‘I’s’ in one house.” 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY XII. Joseph a‚Žd the Mirror. 
An old friend came to pay his respects to Joseph, and, after some remarks upon the bad behaviour of his brethren, Joseph asked him what present he had brought to show his respect. The friend replied that he had long considered what gift would be most suitable to offer, and at last had fixed upon a mirror, which he accordingly produced from his pocket and presented to Joseph, at the same time begging him to admire his own beauteous face in it. 
Defect and Not-being the Mirror whereinAbsolute Perfect Being is reflected 1.He drew forth a mirror from his sideA mirror is what Beauty busies itself with.Since Not-being is tho mirror of Being,If you are wise, choose Not-being (self-abnegation).Being may be displayed in that Not-being,Wealthy men show their liberality on the poor.He who is an hungered is the clear mirror of bread,The tinder is the mirror of the flint and steel.Not-being and Defect, wherever they occur,Are the mirrors of the Beauty of all beings.Because Not-being is a clear filtered essence,Wherein all these beings are infused.When a garment is made by a good tailor,’Tis an evidence of the tailor’s art.Logs of wood would not be duly shapedDid not the carpenter plan outline and detail.The leech skilled in setting bones goesWhere lies the patient with a broken leg.If there were no sick and infirm,How could the excellence of the leech’s art be seen?If vile base copper were not mingled,How could the alchemist show his skill?Defects are the mirrors of the attributes of Beauty,The base is the mirror of the High and Glorious One,Because one contrary shows forth its contrary, 2As honey’s sweetness is shown by vinegar’s sourness.Whoso recognizes and confesses his own defectsIs hastening in the way that leads to perfection!But he advances not towards the AlmightyWho fancies himself to be perfect.No sickness worse than fancying thyself perfectCan infect thy soul, O arrogant misguided one!Shed many tears of blood from eyes and heart,That this self-satisfaction may be driven out.The fault of Iblis lay in saying, “I am better than he,” 3And this same weakness lurks in the soul of all creatures. 
NOTES: 
Compare the parallel passage in Gulshan i Raz, 1. 135, and the notes thereon.2. Cp. “Religio Medici,” Sect. 35: “Herein is divinity conformant unto philosophy, and not only generation founded on contrarieties, but also creation. God, being all things, is contrary unto nothing; out of which were made all things, and so nothing became something, and Omneity informed nullity into existence.”3. Koran vii. II. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY XIII. The Prophet’s Scribe. 
The Prophet had a scribe who used to write down the texts that fell from his lips. At last this scribe became so conceited that he imagined all this heavenly wisdom proceeded from his own wit, and not from the Prophet. Puffed up with self-importance, he fancied himself inspired, and his heart was hardened against his master, and he became a renegade, like the fallen angels Harut and Marut. He took his own foolish surmises to be the truth, whereas they were all wide of the mark, as those of the deaf man who went to condole with a sick neighbour and answered all his remarks at cross purposes. 
How philosophers deceive themselves.On the last day, 1 “when Earth shall quake with quaking,”This earth shall give witness of her condition.For she “shall tell out her tidings openly,”Yea, earth and her rocks shall tell them forth!The philosopher reasons from base analogies(True reason comes not out of a dark corner) ;The philosopher (I say) denies this in his pride of intellect.Say to him, “Go, dash thy head against a wall!”The speech of water, of earth, of mire,Is audible by the ears of men of heart!Tho philosopher, who denies Divine Providence,Is a stranger to the perceptions of saints.He says that the flashes of men’s morbid imaginationsInstil many vain fancies into men’s minds.But, on the contrary, ’tis his perverseness and want of faithWhich implant in himself this vain fancy of negation.The philosopher denies the existence of the Devil;At the same time he is the Devil’s laughing-stock.If thou hast not seen the Devil, look at thyself,Without demon’s aid how came that blue turban 2 on thy brow?Whosoever has a doubt or disquietude in his heartIs a secret denier and philosopher.Now and then he displays firm belief,But that slight dash of philosophy blackens his face.Beware, O believers! That lurks in you too;You may develop innumerable states of mind.All the seventy and two heresies lurk in you;Have a care lest one day they prevail over you!He in whose breast the leaf of true faith is grownMust tremble as a leaf from fear of such a catastrophe.Thou makest a mock of Iblis and the Devil,Because thou art a fine man in thy own sight;But when thy soul shall tell thy wretched faults,What lamentation thou wilt cause to the faithful!The sellers of base gold sit smiling in their shops,Because the touchstone is not as yet in their sight.O Veiler of sins! strip not the veil from us;Lend us aid on the day of trial! 
NOTES: 
Koran xcix. 1-4.2. Blue turbans were considered a sign of hypocrisy (Hafiz, Ode 5). 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY XIV. The Chinese and the Greek Artists. 
The Chinese and the Greeks disputed before the Sultan which of them were the better painters; and, in order to settle the dispute, the Sultan allotted to each a house to be painted by them. The Chinese procured all kinds of paints, and coloured their house in the most elaborate way. The Greeks, on the other hand, used no colours at all, but contented themselves with cleansing the walls of their house from all filth, and burnishing them till they were as clear and bright as the heavens. When the two houses were offered to tho Sultan’s inspection, that painted by tho Chinese was much admired; but the Greek house carried off the palm, as all the colours of the other house were reflected on its walls with an endless variety of shades and hues. 
Knowledge of the heart preferableto the knowledge of the schools.The knowledge of men of heart bears them up,The knowledge of men of the body weighs them down.When ’tis knowledge of the heart, it is a friend;When knowledge of the body, it is a burden.God saith, “As an ass bearing a load of books,” 1The knowledge which is not of Him is a burden.Knowledge which comes not immediately from HimEndures no longer than the rouge of the tirewoman.Nevertheless, if you bear this burden in a right spirit‘Twill be removed, and you will obtain joy.See you bear not that burden out of vainglory,Then you will behold a store of true knowledge within.When you mount the steed of this true knowledge,Straightway the burden will fall from your back.If you drink not His cup, how will you escape lusts?You, who seek no more of Him than to name His name?What do His name and fame suggest? The idea of Him.And the idea of Him guides you to union with Him.Know you a guide without something to which it guides?Were there no roads there would be no ghouls.Know you a name without a thing answering to it?Have you ever plucked a rose (Gul) from Gaf and Lam?You name His name; go, seek the reality named by it!Look for the moon in heaven, not in the water!If you desire to rise above mere names and letters,Make yourself free from self at one stroke!Like a sword be without trace of soft iron;Like a steel mirror, scour off all rust with contrition;Make yourself pure from all attributes of self,That you may see your own pure bright essence!Yea, see in your heart the knowledge of the Prophet,Without book, without tutor, without preceptor.The Prophet saith, “He is one of my people,Whoso is of like temper and spirit with me.His soul beholds me by the selfsame lightWhereby I myself behold him,Without traditions and scriptures and histories,In the fount of the water of life.”Learn the mystery, “I was last night a Kurd,And this morning am become an Arab.” 2This mystery of “last night” and “this morning”Leads you into the road that brings you to God.But if you want an instance of this secret knowledge,Hear the story of the Greeks and the Chinese. 
NOTES: 
Koran lxii. 5.2. Syad Abu’l Wafa, an unlettered Kurd, found a paper with the words Bismillah upon it, and, after spending the night in prayer, found himself able to understand Arabic (Luck-now Commentator). 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY XV. Counsels of Reserve given by the Prophet to his Freedman Zaid. 
At dawn the Prophet said to Zaid,“How is it with thee this morning, O pure disciple?”He replied, “Thy faithful slave am I.” Again he said,“If the garden of faith has bloomed, show a token of it.”He answered, “I was athirst many days,By night I slept not for the burning pangs of love;So that I passed by days and nights,As the point of a spear glances off a shield.For in that state all faith is one,A hundred thousand years and a moment are all one;World without beginning and world without end are one;Reason finds no entrance when mind is thus lost.” 
The Prophet again urged Zaid to deliver to him a present from that celestial region, as a token that he had really been there in the spirit. Zaid answered that he had seen the eight heavens and the seven hells, and the destinies of all men, whether bound to heaven or hell. The body, he said, is as a mother, and the soul as her infant, and death is the time of parturition, when it becomes manifest to what class the infant soul belongs. As, on the day of judgment it will be manifest to all men whether a soul belongs to the saved or to the lost, so now it was plain and manifest to him. He went on to ask the Prophet if he should publish this secret knowledge of his to all men, or hold his peace. The Prophet told him to hold his peace. Zaid, however, proceeded to detail the vision of the last judgment, which he had seen when in the spirit; and the Prophet again commanded him to pause, adding that” God is never ashamed to say the truth,” l and allows His Prophet to speak forth the truth, but that for Zaid to blab forth the secrets seen in ecstatic vision would be wrong. Zaid replied that it was impossible for one who had once beheld the Sun of “The Truth” to keep his vision a secret. But the Prophet in reply instructed him that all men are masters of their own wills, and that he must not reveal what God has determined to keep secret till the last day, in order to leave men till then under the stimulus of hope and fear, and to give them the credit of “believing what is not seen.” 2 More honour is given to the warder of a castle who faithfully executes his trust at a distance from the court than to those courtiers who serve constantly under the king’s own eye. Zaid submitted to tho Prophet’s injunctions, and remained self-contained in his ecstatic visions. Anecdotes of the sage Luqman, of King Solomon, and of a conflagration in the days of the Khalifa ‘Omar complete the section. 
The Prophet’s final counsels of “Reserve”.The Prophet said, “My companions are as the stars,Lights to them that walk aright, missiles against Satan.If every man had strength of eyesightTo look straight at the light of the sun in heaven,What need were there of stars, O humble one,To one who was guided by the light of the sun?Neither moon nor planets would be neededBy one who saw directly the Sun of ‘The Truth.’The Moon 3 declares, as also the clouds and shadows,‘ I am a man, yet it hath been revealed to me.’ 4Like you, I was naturally dark,’Twas the Sun’s revelation that gave me such light.I still am dark compared to the Sun,Though I am light compared to the dark souls of men.Therefore is my light weak, that you may bear it,For you are not strong enough to bear the dazzling Sun.I have, as it were, mixed honey with vinegar,To succour the sickness of your hearts.When you are cured of your sickness, O invalid,Then leave out the vinegar and eat pure honey.When the heart is garnished and swept clear of lust,Therein ‘The God of Mercy sitteth on His throne.’ 5Then God rules the heart immediately,When it has gained this immediate connection with Him.This subject is endless; but where is Zaid,That I may tell him again not to seek notoriety?’Tis not wise to publish these mysteries,Since the last day is approaching to reveal all things.”Now you will not find Zaid, for he is fled,He sprang from the place where the shoes were left, 6Scattering the shoes in his hurry.If you had been Zaid, you too would have been lost,As a star is lost when tho sun shines on it;For then you see no trace or sign of it,No place or track of it in tho milky way.Our senses and our endless discoursesAre annihilated in the light of the knowledge of our King.Our senses and our reason within usAre as waves on waves “assembled before us.” 7When night returns and ’tis the time of the sky’s levee,The stars that were hidden come forth to their work.The people of the world lie unconscious,With veils drawn over their faces, and asleep;But when the morn shall burst forth and the sun ariseEvery creature will raise its head from its couch;To the unconscious God will restore consciousness;They will stand in rings as slaves with rings in ears;Dancing and clapping hands with songs of praise,Singing with joy, “Our Lord hath restored us to life!”Shedding their old skins and bones,As horsemen stirring up a cloud of dust.All pressing on from Not-being to Being,On the last day, as well the thankful as the unthankful. 
NOTES: 
Koran xxxiii. 53.2. Koran ii. 2.3. i.e., the Prophet.4. Koran xviii. 110.5. Koran xx. 4.6. i.e., the vestibule of the house.7. Koran xxxvi. 53. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY XVI. ‘Ali’s Forbearance. 
‘Ali, the “Lion of God,” was once engaged in conflict with a Magian chief, and in the midst of the struggle the Magian spat in his face. ‘Ali, instead of taking vengeance on him, at once dropped his sword, to the Magian’s great astonishment. On his inquiring the reason of such forbearance, ‘Ali informed him that the “Lion of God” did not destroy life for the satisfaction of his own vengeance, but simply to carry out God’s will, and that whenever he saw just cause, he held his hand even in the midst of the strife, and spared the foe. The Prophet, ‘Ali continued, had long since informed him that he would die by the hand of his own stirrup-bearer (Ibn Maljun), and the stirrup-bearer had frequently implored ‘Ali to kill him, and thus save him from the commission of that great crime; but ‘Ali said he always refused to do so, as to him death was as sweet as life, and he felt no anger against his destined assassin, who was only the instrument of God’s eternal purpose. The Magian chief, on hearing ‘Ali’s discourse, was so much affected that he embraced Islam, together with all his family, to the number of fifty souls. 
How the Prophet whispered to ‘Ali’s stirrup-bearerthat he would one day assassinate his master.“The Prophet whispered in the ear of my servantThat one day he would sever my head from my neck.The Prophet also warned by inspiration me, his friend,That the hand of my servant would destroy me.My servant cried, “O kill me first,That I may not become guilty of so grievous a sin!”I replied, “Since my death is to come from thee,How can I balk the fateful decree?”He fell at my feet and cried, “O gracious lord,For God’s sake cleave now my body in twain,That such an evil deed may not be wrought by me,And my soul burn with anguish for its beloved.”I replied, “What God’s pen has written, it has written;In presence of its writings knowledge is confounded;There is no anger in my soul against thee,Because I attribute not this deed to thee;Thou art God’s instrument. God’s hand is the agent.How can I chide or fret at God’s instrument?”He said, “If this be so, why is there retaliation?” 1I answered, “’Tis from God, and ’tis God’s secret;If He shows displeasure at His own acts,From His displeasure He evolves a Paradise;He feels displeasure at His own acts,Because He is a God of vengeance as of mercy.In this city of events He is the Lord,In this realm He is the King who plans all events.If He crushes His own instruments,He makes those crushed ones fair in His sight.Know the great mystery of ‘whatever verses we cancel,Or cause you to forget, we substitute better for them.’ 2Whatever law God cancels, He makes as a weed,And in its stead He brings forth a rose.So night cancels the business of the daytime,When the reason that lights our minds becomes inanimate.Again, night is cancelled by the light of day,And inanimate reason is rekindled to life by its rays.Though darkness produces this sleep and quiet,Is not the ‘water of life’ in the darkness? 3Are not spirits refreshed in that very darkness?Is not that silence the season of heavenly voices?For from contraries contraries are brought forth,Out of darkness was created light.The Prophet’s wars brought about the present peace,The peace of these latter days resulted from those wars.That conqueror of hearts cut off a thousand heads,That the heads of his people might rest in peace.”God’s rebuke to Adam for scorning Iblis.To whomsoever God’s order comes,He must smite with his sword even his own child.Fear then, and revile not the wicked,For the wicked are impotent under God’s commands.In presence of God’s commands bow down the neck of pride.Scoff not nor chide even them that go astray!One day Adam cast a look of contempt and scornUpon Iblis, thinking what a wretch he was.He felt self-important and proud of himself,And he smiled at the actions of cursed Iblis.God Almighty cried out to him, “O pure one,Thou art wholly ignorant of hidden mysteries.If I were to blab the faults of the unfortunate,I should root up the mountains from their bases,And lay bare the secrets of a hundred Adams,And convert a hundred fresh Iblises into Mosalmans.”Adam answered, “I repent me of my scornful looks;Such arrogant thoughts shall not be mine again.O Lord, pardon this rashness in Thy slave;I repent; chastise me not for these words!”O Aider of aid-seekers, guide us,For there is no security in knowledge or wealth;“Lead not our hearts astray after Thou hast guided us,” 4And avert the evil that the “Pen” has written.Turn aside from our souls the evil written in our fates,Repel us not from the tables of purity!O God, Thy grace is the proper object of our desire;To couple others with Thee is not proper.Nothing is bitterer than severance from Thee,Without Thy shelter there is naught but perplexity.Our worldly goods rob us of our heavenly goods,Our body rends the garment of our soul.Our hands, as it were, prey on our feet;Without reliance on Thee how can we live?And if the soul escapes these great perils,It is made captive as a victim of misfortunes and fears,Inasmuch as when the soul lacks union with the Beloved,It abides forever blind and darkened by itself.If Thou showest not the way, our life is lost;A life living without Thee esteem as dead!If Thou findest fault with Thy slaves,Verily it is right in Thee, O Blessed One!If Thou shouldst call sun and moon obscure,If Thou shouldst call the straight cypress crooked,If Thou shouldst declare the highest heaven base,Or rich mines and oceans paupers,All this is the truth in relation to Thy perfection!Thine is the dominion and the glory and the wealth!For Thou art exempt from defect and not-being,Thou givest existence to things non-existent, and againThou makest them non-existent. 
NOTES: 
i,e., why is the rule “an eye for an eye” enjoined in the Koran, ii. 173?2. Koran ii, 100.3. Alluding to the “water of life” in the land of darkness discovered by Khizr.4. Koran iii. 6. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





Epilogue to Book I. 
Alas! the forbidden fruits were eaten,And thereby the warm life of reason was congealed.A grain of wheat eclipsed the sun Of Adam, lLike as the Dragon’s tail 2 dulls the brightness of the moon.Behold how delicate is the heart, that a morsel of dustClouded its moon with foul obscurity!When bread is “substance,” to eat it nourishes us;When ’tis empty “form,” it profits nothing.Like as the green thorn which is cropped by the camel,And then yields him pleasure and nutriment;When its greenness has gone and it becomes dry,If the camel crops that same thorn in the desert,It wounds his palate and mouth without pity,As if conserve of roses should turn to sharp swords.When bread is “substance,” it is as a green thorn;When ’tis “form,” ’tis as the dry and coarse thorn.And thou eatest it in the same way as of yoreThou wert wont to eat it, O helpless being,Eatest this dry thing in the same manner,After the real “substance” is mingled with dust;It has become mingled with dust, dry in pith and rind.O camel, now beware of that herb!The Word is become foul with mingled earth;The water is become muddy; close the mouth of the well,Till God makes it again pure and sweet;Yea, till He purifies what He has made foul.Patience will accomplish thy desire, not haste.Be patient, God knows what is best. 
NOTES: 
Muhammadans think the forbidden fruit to have been wheat.2. The descending node of the moon (see Gulshan i Raz, I. 233). 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





BOOK II. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





PROLOGUE. 
THE Composition of this Masnavi has been delayed for a season; 1: Time is needed for blood to become milk.Till thy fortune comes forth as a new-born babe,Blood becomes not milk, sweet and pleasant to the mind.When that light of God, Husamu-’d-DinTurned his course down from the summit of heaven,While he had ascended to sublimest verities,In the absence of his spring the buds blossomed not,But when out of that sea he came to shore,The lute of the poesy of the Masnavi sounded again.This Masnavi, which is the polisher of spirits,Its recommencement occurred on the day of “Opening.”The commencement date of this precious workWas the year six hundred and sixty-two of the Flight.The Bulbul started on this date and became a hawk;Yea, a hawk to hunt out these mysteries.May the wrist of the King be the resting-place of this hawk,And may this door be open to the people for ever! 
NOTES: 
The delay was caused by the grief of Husam for the death of his wife. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY I. The Sufi’s Beast 
After anecdotes of the man, in the time of ‘Omar, who mistook his eyelash for the new moon, of one who stole a snake and got bitten by it, and of ‘Isa’s foolish disciple who besought the Lord to teach him the spell whereby he raised the dead, comes the following story. 
A certain Sufi, after a long day’s journey, arrived at a monastery, where he put up for the night, and strictly enjoined his servant to groom his ass carefully and give him plenty of litter and fodder. The servant assured him that his minute directions were superfluous, and promised to attend to the ass most carefully; but when his master’s back was turned he neglected the ass, and the poor animal remained all night without water or food. Consequently he was weak and unfit to travel next morning, and in spite of the blows and kicks that were showered on him, could not carry his master, but had to be led. The other Sufis who were traveling with his owner thought that the ass was useless, and when they arrived at the place where they halted for the night, they sold the ass to a traveler, and with the proceeds of the sale bought delicate viands and torches, and made a feast. The owner of the ass, who was ignorant of this transaction, shared the feast, and joined in the chorus sung by the others, “The ass is gone, the ass is gone,” without attaching any sense to the words, and blindly following their example. Next morning he asked his servant what had become of the ass, and the servant told him it had been sold, adding that he thought he had known it overnight, because he had heard him singing “The ass is gone” along with the other Sufis. In the course of this story there occur anecdotes of God consulting with the angels as to the creation of man, of a king who lost his hawk and found it again in the house of a poor old man, and of Shaikh Ahmad Khizrawiya buying sweetmeats for his creditors. 
Why the poet veils his doctrines in fables.What is it hinders me from expounding my doctrinesBut this, that my hearers’ hearts incline elsewhere.Their thoughts are intent on that Sufi guest;They are immersed in his affairs neck deep.So I am compelled to turn from my discourseTo that story, and to set forth his condition.But, O friend, think not this Sufi a mere outward form,As children see in a vine nothing but raisins.O son, our bodies are as dried grapes and raisins;If you are a man, cast away these things.If you pass on to the pure mysteries of God,You will be exalted above the nine heavenly spheres.Now hear the outward form of my story,But yet separate the grain from the chaff.Why the prophets were sent.God sent the prophets for this purpose,Namely, to sever infidelity from faith.God sent the prophets to mankindThat they might gather the pure grain on their tray.Infidel and faithful, Mosalman and Jew,Before the prophets came, seemed all as one.Before they came we were all alike,No one knew whether he was right or wrong.Genuine coin and base coin were current alike;The world was a night, and we travelers in the dark,Till the sun of the prophets arose, and cried,“Begone. O slumber; welcome, O pure light!”Now the eye sees how to distinguish colors,It sees the difference between rubies and pebbles.The eye distinguishes jewels from dust,Hence it is dust makes the eyes smart.Makers of base coin hate the daylight,Coins of pure gold love the daylight,Because daylight is the mirror that reflects them,So that they see their own perfect beauty.Mystical Meaning of “Daylight” 
God has named the resurrection “that day;”Day shows off the beauty of red and yellow.Wherefore “Day” in ‘truth is the mystery of the saints;One day of their moons is as whole years.Know, “Day “ is the reflection of the mystery of the saints,Eye-closing night that of their hidden secrets.Therefore hath God revealed the chapter “Daylight,” 1Which daylight is the light of the heart of Mustafa.On the other view, that daylight means “The Friend,”It is also a reflection of the same prophet.For, as it is wrong to swear by a transitory being,How can we suppose a transitory being spoken of by God?The Friend of God said, “I love not them that set?” 2How, then, could Allah have meant a transitory being?Again, the words “by the night” mean Muhammad’s veiling,Namely, the fair earthly body that he bore;When his sun proceeded from heaven on highInto that body’s night, it said, “He hath not forsaken thee;”Union with God arose out of the depth of that disgrace;That boon was the word, “He hath not been displeased.”Expressions of religious or other feeling derive their only value from the state of mind from which they proceed.Every expression is the sign of a state of mind;That state is a hand, the expression an instrument.A goldRumi’s instruments in the hand of a cobblerAre as grains of wheat sown on sand.The tools of a cobbler in the hand of a cultivatorAre as grass before a dog or bones before an ass.The words, “I am the Truth” were light in Mansur’s 3 mouth,In the mouth of Pharaoh “I am Lord Supreme” was blasphemy.The staff in the hand of Moses was a witness,In the hands of the magicians it was naught.For this cause ‘Isa taught not to that foolish manThe words of power whereby he raised the dead.For he who is ignorant misuses the instrument ;If you strike flint on mud you will get no fire.Hand and instrument resemble flint and steel;You must have a pair; a pair is needed to generate.He who has no peer or member is the “One,”An uneven number, One without dispute!Whoso says “one” and “two,” and so on,Confesses thereby the existence of the “One.”When the illusion of seeing double is swept away,They who say “one” and “two” are even as they who say “One.”If you take “One” as your ball in his tennis-field,It is made to revolve by the strokes of his bat. 4Yea, the ball that is even and without faultIs made to revolve by the strokes of the King’s hand.O man of double vision, 5 hearken with attention,Seek a cure for your defective sight by listening.Many are the holy words that find no entranceInto blind hearts, but they enter hearts full of light.But the deceits of Satan enter crooked hearts,Even as crooked shoes fit crooked feet.Though you repeat pious expressions again and again,If you are a fool, they affect you not at all;Nay, not though you set them down in writing,And though you proclaim them vauntingly;Wisdom averts its face from you, O man of sin,Wisdom breaks away from you and takes to flight!On Taqlid, blind imitation or cant.“O wretch, why did you not come and say to me,‘Such and such a disastrous affair has occurred?’”The servant replied, “By Allah, I came again and again,That I might acquaint you with the matter.You were always saying, ‘The ass is gone, my lad!’Along with the others in high excitement;So I went away, thinking you knew all about it,And were pleased at the transaction, being a wise man.”The Sufi said, “They were all singing the same words,So I felt impelled to sing them as well.Blind imitation of them has undone me.Cursed be that blind imitation!”The effect of blindly imitating unprofitable conductIs that men cast away honor for a morsel of bread.The ecstasy of that company cast a reflection,Whereby that Sufi’s heart became ecstatic like them.You need many reflections from your associatesIn order to draw water from the peerless Ocean.The first reflection cast is mere blind imitation;After it has been often repeated you may test its truth.Till it is thus verified, take it not from your friends;The drop, not yet become pearl, sever not from its shell.Evil influence of covetousness. 
Would you have eyes and ears of reason clear,Tear off the obstructing veil of greed!The blind imitation of that Sufi proceeded from greed;Greed closed his mind to the pure light.Yea, ’twas greed that led astray that Sufi,And brought him to loss of property and ruin.Greed of victuals, greed of that ecstatic singingHindered his wits from grasping the truth.If greed stained the face of a mirror,That mirror would be as deceitful as we men are. 6If a pair of scales were greedy of riches,Would they tell truly the weight of anything?The Prophet saith, “O people, through singleness of mind,I ask of you no recompense for my prophesying; 7I am a guide; God buyeth my guidance for you,God giveth you my guidance in both worlds.True, a guide deserves his wages;Wages are due to him for directing you aright.But what are my wages? The vision of The Friend.Abu Bakr indeed offered me forty thousand pieces of gold,But his forty thousand pieces were no wages for me. 8How could I take brass beads for pearls of Aden?”I will tell you a tale; hearken attentively,That you may know how greed closes up the ears.Every man subject to greed is a miser.Can eyes of hearts clouded with greed see clearly?The illusion of rank and riches blinds his sight,Like hair dropping down before his eyes. 
NOTES: 
Koran xciii: “By the daylight and by the night thy, Lord hath not forsaken thee nor been displeased.”2. Koran vi. 76: “And when the night overshadowed Abraham, he beheld a star, and he said, ‘This is my Lord;’ but when it set he said, ‘I love not Gods which set.’”3. Mansur Hallaj, a celebrated Sufi who was put to death at Bagdad in 309 A.H. for using these words.4. i.e., unity is made to appear as plurality (see Gulshan i Raz, I. 710).5. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 104.6. The Turkish commentator translates thus. The Lucknow copy reads Ba sati for Ma sti.7. Koran xi 53.8. Abu Bakr made over all his goods to the Prophet in aid of the expedition to Syria. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY II. The Pauper and the Prisoners. 
A certain pauper obtained admittance to a prison, and annoyed the prisoners by eating up all their victuals and leaving them none. At last they made a formal complaint to the Qazi, and prayed him to banish the greedy pauper from the prison. The Qazi summoned the pauper before him, and asked him why he did not go to his own house instead of living on the prisoners. The pauper replied that he had no house or means of livelihood except that supplied by the prison; whereupon the Qazi ordered him to be carried through the city, and proclamation to be made that he was a pauper, that no one might be induced to lend him money or trade with him. Accordingly the attendants sought for a camel whereon to carry him through the city, and at last induced a Kurd who sold firewood to lend his camel for the purpose. The Kurd consented from greed of reward, and the pauper, being seated on the camel, was carried through the city from morning till evening, proclamation being made in Persian, Arabic, and Kurdish that he was a pauper. When evening came the Kurd demanded payment, but the pauper refused to give him anything, observing that if he had kept his ears open he must have heard the proclamation. Thus the Kurd was led by greed to spend the day in useless labor. 
Satan’s office in the world.The pauper said, “Your beneficence is my sustenance;To me, as to aliens, your prison is a paradise.If you banish me from your prison in reprobation,I must needs die of poverty and affliction.”Just so Iblis said to Allah, “O have compassion;Lord! respite me till the day of resurrection;For in this prison of the world I am at oase,That I may slay the children of my enemies.From every one who has true faith for food,And as bread for his provisions by the way,I take it away by fraud or deceit,So that they raise bitter cries of regret.Sometimes I menace them with poverty, 2Sometimes I blind their eyes with tresses and moles.”In this prison the food of true faith is scarce,And by the tricks of this dog what there is is lost.In spite of prayers and fasts and endless pains,Our food is altogether devoured by him.Let us seek refuge with Allah from Satan.Alas ! we are perishing by his insolence.The dog is one, yet he enters a thousand forms; 3Whatever he enters straight becomes himself.Whatever makes you shiver, know he is in it,The Devil is hidden beneath its outward form.When he finds no form at hand, he enters your thoughts,To cause them to draw you into sin.From your thoughts proceeds destruction,When from time to time evil thoughts occur to you.Sometimes thoughts of pleasure, sometimes of business,Sometimes thoughts of science, sometimes of house and home.Sometimes thoughts of gain and traffic,Sometimes thoughts of merchandise and wealth.Sometimes thoughts of money and wives and children,Sometimes thoughts of wisdom or of sadness.Sometimes thoughts of household goods and fine linen,Sometimes thoughts of carpets, sometimes of sweepers.Sometimes thoughts of mills, gardens, and villas,Sometimes of clouds and mists and jokes and jests.Sometimes thoughts of peace and war,Sometimes thoughts of honor and disgrace.Ah! cast out of your head these vain imaginations,Ah! sweep out of your heart these evil suggestions.Cry, “There is no power nor strength but in God!”To avert the Evil One from the world and your own soul.It is the true Beloved who causes alloutward earthly beauty to exist.Whatsoever is perceived by sense He annuls,But He establishes that which is hidden from the senses.The lover’s love is visible, his Beloved hidden.The Friend is absent, the distraction he causes present.Renounce these affections for outward forms,Love depends not on outward form or face.Whatever is beloved is not a mere empty form,Whether your beloved be of the earth or of heaven.Whatever be the form you have fallen in love with,Why do you forsake it the moment life leaves it?The form is still there; whence, then, this disgust at it?Ah! lover, consider well what is really your beloved.If a thing perceived by outward senses is the beloved,Then all who retain their senses must still love it;And since love increases constancy,How can constancy fail while form abides? 4But the truth is, the sun’s beams strike the wall,And the wall only reflects that borrowed light.Why give your heart to mere stones, O simpleton?Go! seek the source of light which shineth always!Distinguish well true dawn from false dawn,Distinguish the color of the wine from that of the cup;So that, instead of many eyes of caprice,One eye may be opened through patience and constancy.Then you will behold true colors instead of false,And precious jewels in lieu of stones.But what is a jewel? Nay, you will be an ocean of pearls;Yea, a sun that measures the heavens!The real Workman is hidden in His workshop,Go you into that workshop and see Him face to face.Inasmuch as over that Workman His work spreads a curtain,You cannot see Him outside His work.Since His workshop is the abode of the Wise One,Whoso seeks Him without is ignorant of Him.Come, then, into His workshop, which is Not-being, 5That you may see the Creator and creation at once.Whoso has seen how bright is the workshopSees how obscure is the outside of that shop.Rebellious Pharaoh set his face towards Being (egoism),And was perforce blind to that workshop.Perforce he looked for the Divine decree to change,And hoped to turn his destiny from his door.While destiny at the impotence of that crafty oneAll the while was secretly mocking.He slew a hundred thousand guiltless babesThat the ordinance and decree of Allah might be thwarted.That the prophet Moses might not be born alive,He committed a thousand murders in the land.He did all this, yet Moses was born,And was protected against his wrath.Had he but seen the Eternal workshop,He had refrained hand and foot from these vain devices.Within his house was Moses safe and sound,While he was killing the babes outside to no purpose.Just so the slave of lusts who pampers his bodyFancies that some other man bears him ill-will;Saying this one is my enemy, and this one my foe,While it is his own body which is his enemy and foe,He is like Pharaoh, and his body is like Moses,He runs abroad crying, “where is my foe?”While lust is in his house, which is his body,He bites his finger in spite against strangers.Then follows an anecdote of a man who slew his mother because she was always misconducting herself with strangers, and who excused himself by pleading that if he had not done so he would have been obliged to slay strangers every day, and thus incur blood-guiltiness. Lust is likened to this abandoned mother; when it is once slain, you are at peace with all men. In answer to an objection that if this were so the prophets and saints, who have subdued lust, would not have been hated and oppressed as they were, it is pointed out that they who hated the prophets in reality hated themselves, just as sick men quarrel with the physician or boys with the teacher. Prophets and saints are created to test the dispositions of men, that the good may be severed from the bad. The numerous grades of prophets, of saints, and of holy men are ordained, as so many curtains of the light of God, to tone down its brilliance, and make it visible to all grades of human sight. 
NOTES: 
Koran vii. 13.2. Koran ii. 279.3. cf. Gulshan i Raz, .4. This couplet exercises both the Turkish and the Lucknow commentators.5. i.e., annihilation of self and of all phenomenal being, regarding self as naught in the presence of the Deity. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY III. The King and his Two Slaves. 
A king purchased two slaves, one extremely handsome, and the other very ugly. He sent the first away to the bath, and in his absence questioned the other. He told him that the first slave had given a very bad account of him, saying that he was a thief and a bad character, and asked if it was true. The second slave replied that the first was everything that was good, his inward qualities corresponding to the beauty of his outward appearance, and that whatever he had told the king was worthy of credit. The king replied that beauty was only an accident, and that, according to the tradition, accidents “endure only two moments;” that at death the animal soul is destroyed, that the text, “Whoso shall present himself with beauty shall receive tenfold reward,” I does not refer to outward accidents, but to the “substance,” the eternal soul. The slave in reply urged that the accidents of good works and thoughts will in some way bear fruit in the next world, pointing out that thought is always the precursor of the completed work, as the plan of the architect precedes the building, and the gardener’s design the perfect fruit resulting from his labors. He added that the world is only the realized thought of “Universal Reason” 2 The king then sent away the slave with whom he had held this discourse, and summoned the other, and told him that his fellow slave had given a bad account of him, and asked what he had to say. He replied that his fellow slave was a liar and a rascal, and the king then dismissed him, observing that, in accordance with the tradition, “Every man is hidden under his own tongue,” his tongue had betrayed his inner vileness. “The safety of a man lies in holding his tongue.” 
The apostolical succession of the prophets and the saintsWith that “brightness of lightning” 3 He kindled their soulsSo that Adam acquired knowledge from that light.That, which shone from Adam was gathered by Seth,Wherefore Adam made him his viceroy when he saw it.When Noah received the gift of that lustre,He became a soul bearing pearls in the tempest of the flood.By that light the soul of Abraham was led,Without fear he entered Nimrod’s fiery furnace.When Ishmael sought out that light,He meekly laid his head beneath his father’s bright knife.The soul of David was warmed by its heat,Iron became pliable by the force of his weaving. 4When Solomon was nurtured by its fruition,The devils became the submissive slaves of his will.When Jacob bowed his head to the Divine decree,He recovered his sight at the scent of his son. 5When moonlike Joseph saw that brilliant sun,He became so expert as he was in interpreting dreams.When the staff drew might from the hand of Moses,It devoured the realm of Pharaoh at a mouthful.When the soul of Jirjis 6 became privy to its light,He sacrificed his life seven times, and regained it.When Zakhariah 7 boasted of his love for it,He ransomed his life in the hollow of the tree.When Jonah swallowed a draught from that cup,He found repose in the belly of the fish.When John the Baptist became filled with its unction,He laid his head in the golden charger in ardour for it.When Jethro became aware of this exaltation,He risked his life to find it.Patient Job gave thanks for seven years,For in his calamities he saw signs of its approach.When Khizr and Elias boasted of gaining it,They found the water of life and were no more seen.When Jesus. Son of Mary, found that ladder of ascent,He ascended to the height of the fourth heaven.When Muhammad gained that blessed possession,In a moment he cleft asunder the disk of the moon. 8When Abu Bakr became the exemplar of that grace,He was companion of that Lord, and a ‘c faithful witness.”When ‘Omar was enraptured with that beauty,Like a mind he discerned true and false. 9When Osman viewed those brilliant sights,He diffused light and became “Lord of the two lights.” 10When Martaza (‘Ali) shined with its reflection,He became the “Lion of God” in the soul’s domain.When his two sons were illumined by this light,They became the “pearly earrings of highest heaven;” 11One of them losing his life by poison,The other losing his head as he went about his march.When Junaid was succoured by the forces of that light,His ecstatic states exceeded counting.Bayazid saw his way to increased fruition thereof,And gained from God the name “Polestar of Gnostics.”What time King Mansur became victorious, 12He left his throne and hastened to the stake.When Karkhi of Karkh became its keeper,He became lord of love and of the breath of Jesus.Ibrahim son of Adham rode his horse to that point,And became king of kings of equity.And that Shakik starting from that junctionBecame a sun of wit and acute of genius.Fazil from a highway robber became a sage of the way, 13When he was regarded with esteem by the King.To Bishr Hafi the doctrine, was announced,And he set his face towards the desert of inquiry.When Zu-l-Ntin became distraught with care for it,Egypt (Milk) as sugar became the house of his soul.When Sari 14 lost his head in seeking the way thereto,His rank was exalted above the seats of the mighty.A hundred thousand great (spiritual) kingsExalted by this divine light approach the world.Their names remain hidden through God’s jealousy;Every beggar tells not their names. 15 
NOTES: 
Koran vi. 161.2. i.e., the Logos as Demiurge.3. Koran xxiv. 43. The prophetic inspiration is likened to a light handed on from one to another.4. Koran xxi. 80.5. Koran lxxvii. 96.6. Jirjis or St. George is supposed by Muhammadans to be the same person as Khizr or Elias.7. Zakhariah the prophet is said to have taken refuge from his persecutors in the hollow of a tree.8. Koran liv. 1.9. Omar was called “The Discerner.”10. He bore this name because he had two daughters of Muhammad as his wives.11. A tradition gives this title to Hasan and Hussain.12. Mansur Hallaj, the celebrated Sufi impaled at Bagdad. Shah or King was a title often assumed by darveshes.13. The “way” means the Sufi doctrines.14. All these saints lived in the second and third centuries of the Flight.15. In the introduction to the Nafahatu-’l Uns, Jami says there are always 4000 saints on the earth who are not even known to one another. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY IV. The Falcon and the Owls. 
A certain falcon lost his way, and found himself in the waste places inhabited by owls. The owls suspected that he had come to seize their nests, and all surrounded him to make an end of him. The falcon assured them that he had no such design as they imputed to him, that his abode was on the wrist of the king, and that he did not envy their foul habitation. The owls replied that he was trying to deceive them, inasmuch as such a strange bird as he could not be a favorite of the king. The falcon repeated that he was indeed a favorite of the king, and that the king would assuredly destroy their houses if they injured him, and proceeded to give them some good advice on the folly of trusting to outward appearances. He said, “It is true I am not homogeneous with the king, but yet the king’s light is reflected in me, as water becomes homogeneous with earth in plants. I am, as it were, the dust beneath the king’s feet; and if you become like me in this respect, you will be exalted as I am. Copy the outward form you behold in me, and perchance you will reach the real substance of the king.” 
The right use of forms.That my outward form may not mislead you,Digest my sweet advice before copying me.Many are they who have been captured by form,Who aimed at form, and found Allah.After all, soul is linked to body,Though it in nowise resembles the body.The power of the light of the eye is mated with fat,The light of the heart is hidden in a drop of blood.Joy harbors in the kidneys and pain in the liver,The lamp of reason in the brains of the head;Smell in the nostrils and speech in the tongue,Concupiscence in the flesh and courage in the heart.These connections are not without a why and a how,But reason is at a loss to understand the how.Universal Soul had connection with Partial Soul, 1Which thence conceived a pearl and retained it in its bosom.From that connection, like Mary,Soul became pregnant of a fair Messiah;Not that Messiah who walked upon earth and water,But that Messiah who is higher than space. 2Next, as Soul became pregnant by the Soul of souls,So by the former Soul did the world become pregnant;Then the World brought forth another world,And of this last are brought forth other worlds.Should I reckon them in my speech till the last dayI should fail to tell the total of these resurrections. 3 
NOTES: 
This is a figurative account of the emanations of Absolute Being, whereby the world of phenomena is constituted (see Gulshan i Raz, , note, and ).2. i.e., the spirit of the Prophet Muhammad, whom the Sufis identify with the Primal Soul.3. Continually is creation born again in a new creation” (Gulshan i Raz, ). By constant effluxes from Absolute Being the world of phenomena is every moment renewed. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY V. The Thirsty Man who threw Bricks into the Water. 
A thirsty man discovered a tank of water, but could not drink of it because it was surrounded by a high wall. He took some of the bricks off the top of the wall and cast them over it into the water. The water cried out, “What advantage do you gain by doing this?” He made answer, “The first advantage is this, that I hear your voice; and the second, that the more bricks I pull off the wall, the nearer I approach to you.” The moral is, that so long as the wall of the body intervenes, we cannot reach the water of life. The abasement of the body brings men nearer to union with the Deity. Destroy, therefore, the fleshly lusts which war against the soul. Then follows another parable to illustrate the folly of procrastination in this important matter. 
“It was not ye who shot, but God shot; andthose arrows were God’s not yours”. 1’Tis God’s light that illumines the senses’ light,That is the meaning of “Light upon light.” 2The senses’ light draws us earthwards,God’s light carries us heavenwards.As objects of sense are of base condition,God’s light is an ocean, and the senses’ light a dewdrop.But that light which is “upon this light” is not seen,Save through signs and holy discourses.Since the senses’ light is gross and dense,It lies hidden in the black pupil of the eye.When you cannot see the senses’ light with the eye,How can you see with the eye the Light of the mind?As the senses’ light is hidden in these gross veils,Must not that Light which is pure be also hidden?Like the senses, this world is ruled by a hidden Power.It confesses its impotence before that hidden Power,Which sometimes exalts it and sometimes lays it low,Sometimes makes it dry and sometimes moist.The hand is hidden, yet we see the pen writing;The horse is galloping, yet the rider is hid from view.The arrow speeds forth, yet the bow is not seen;Souls are seen, the Soul of souls (God) is hidden.Break not the arrow, for it is the arrow of the KingYea, it is an arrow from the bow of Wisdom.“Ye shot not when ye shot,” was said by God;God’s action has predominance over all actions.Break your own passion, break not that arrow,The eye of passion takes milk to be blood.Kiss that arrow and bear it to the King,Yea, though it be stained with your own blood.Whatsoever is seen is weak and base and impotent;What is hidden is equally fierce and headstrong.We are the captured game; who is the snare?We are the balls; where is the bat?He tears and mends; who is this tailor?He fans and kindles the flame; who is this kindler?At one time He makes the faithful one an infidel,At another He makes the atheist a devotee!Next comes an anecdote of a dirty man who refused to bathe because he was ashamed to go into the water, with the moral that “Shame hinders religion;” 3 and then another of Zu’l Nun, a celebrated Egyptian Sufi of the third century A.H. Zu’l Nun appeared to his ignorant friends to be mad, and they accordingly confined him in a madhouse. After a time they thought that he was not really mad, but had feigned madness for some deep purpose, and they went to the madhouse to inquire into the state of his health. When they arrived there, Zu’l Nun asked them who they were, and they answered that they were his devoted friends, who were now convinced that the story of his being mad was a calumny. Zu’l Nun jumped up and drove them away with sticks and stones, saying that true friendship would have been manifested in sharing his troubles, even as pure gold is tried by fire. 
NOTES: 
Koran viii. 17, meaning, “God is the Fa’il i Hakiki, or Only Real Agent.”2. Koran xxiv. 35.3. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, vol. ii. p and 418, gives two proverbs - one, “Shame is a part of religion;” and the other, “Shame hinders getting a livelihood.” 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY VI. Luqman’s Master examines him and discovers his Acuteness. 
Luqman the Sage, 1 who is sometimes identified with Esop, and sometimes with the nephew of the prophet. Job, though “gifted with wisdom by God,” was a slave. His master, however, discovered his worth, and became extremely attached to him, so that he never received any delicacy without giving Luqman a share of it. One day, having received a watermelon, he gave Luqman the best part of it, and Luqman devoured it with such apparent relish that his master was tempted to taste it. To his surprise he found it very bitter, and asked Luqman why he had not told him of this. Luqman replied that it was not for him, who lived on his master’s bounty, to complain if he now and then received disagreeable things at his hands. Thus, though to outward appearance a slave, Luqman showed himself to be a lord. 
Love endures hardships at the hands of the Beloved.Through love bitter things seem sweet,Through love bits of copper are made gold.Through love dregs taste like pure wine,Through love pains are as healing balms.Through love thorns become roses,And through love vinegar becomes sweet wine.Through love the stake becomes a throne,Through love reverse of fortune seems good fortune.Through love a prison seems a rose bower,Without love a grate full of ashes seems a garden.Through love burning fire is pleasing light,Through love the Devil becomes a Houri.Through love hard stones become soft as butter,Without love soft wax becomes hard iron.Through love grief is as joy,Through love Ghouls turn into angels.Through love stings are as honey,Through love lions are harmless as mice.Through love sickness is health,Through love wrath is as mercy.Through love the dead rise to life,Through love the king becomes a slave.Even when an evil befalls you, have due regard;Regard well him who does you this ill turn.The sight which regards the ebb and flow of good and illOpens a passage for you from misfortune to happiness.Thence you see the one state moves you into the other, 2One opposite state generating its opposite in exchange.So long as you experience not fears after joys,How can you look for pleasures after disgusts?While ye fear the doom of the angel on the left hand,Men hope for the bliss of the angel on the right. 3May you gain two wings! 4 A fowl with only one wingIs impotent to fly, O well-intentioned one!Now either permit me to hold my peace altogether,Or give me leave to explain the whole matter.And if you dislike this and forbid that,Who can tell what your desire is?You must have the soul of Abraham in order with lightTo see the mansions of Paradise in the fire.Step by step he ascended above sun and moon,And so lagged not below, as a ring that fastens a door.Since the “Friend of God” ascended above the heavens,And said, “I love not Gods that set;” 5So this world of the body is a breeder of misconceptionsIn all who have not fled from lust. 
NOTES: 
See Koran xxxi. Another anecdote of his wit occurs in Book I.2. The doctrine of Heraclitus, that opposite states generate one another, is discussed by Jelaludin in a passage quoted in Lumsden’s Grammar, ii. 323, and is mentioned in the Phado and the Nicomachean Ethics.3. An anacoluthon (see Koran i. 16).4. The two wings are hope and fear, both of which are needed to guide men’s religious flight (see Book III. on “Probability the guide of life”).5. Koran vi. 77. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY VII. Moses and the Shepherd. 
Next follows an anecdote of Bilkis, Queen of Sheba, whose reason was enlightened by the counsels of the Hoopoo sent to her by King Solomon. Outward sense is as opposed to true reason as Abu Jahl was to Muhammad; and when the outward senses are replaced by the true inner reason, man sees that the body is only foam, and the heart the limitless ocean. Afterwards comes an anecdote of a philosopher who was struck blind for cavilling at the verse, “What think ye? If at early morn your waters shall have sunk away, who will then give you clear running water?” 1 This is succeeded by the story of Moses and the shepherd. Moses once heard a shepherd praying as follows: “O God, show me where thou art, that I may become. Thy servant. I will clean Thy shoes and comb Thy hair, and sew Thy clothes, and fetch Thee milk.” When Moses heard him praying in this senseless manner, he rebuked him, saying, “O foolish one, though your father was a Mosalman, you have become an infidel. God is a Spirit, and needs not such gross ministrations as, in your ignorance, you suppose.” The shepherd was abashed at his rebuke, and tore his clothes and fled away into the desert. Then a voice from heaven was heard, saying, “O Moses, wherefore have you driven away my servant? Your office is to reconcile my people with me, not to drive them away from me. I have given to each race different usages and forms of praising and adoring me. I have no need of their praises, being exalted above all such needs. I regard not the words that are spoken, but the heart that offers them. I do not require fine words, but a burning heart. Men’s ways of showing devotion to me are various, but so long as the devotions are genuine, they are accepted.”Religious forms indifferent. 
A voice came from God to Moses,“Why hast thou sent my servant away?Thou hast come to draw men to union with me,Not to drive them far away from me.So far as possible, engage not in dissevering;‘The thing most repugnant to me is divorce.’ 2To each person have I allotted peculiar forms,To each have I given particular usages.What is praiseworthy in thee is blameable in him,What is poison for thee is honey for him.What is good in him is bad in thee,What is fair in him is repulsive in thee.I am exempt from all purity and impurity,I need not the laziness or alacrity of my people.I created not men to gain a profit from them,But to shower my beneficence upon them.In the men of Hind the usages of Hind are praiseworthy,In the men of Sind those of Sind.I am not purified by their praises,’Tis they who become pure and shining thereby.I regard not the outside and the words,I regard the inside and the state of heart.I look at the heart if it be humble,Though the words may be the reverse of humble.Because the heart is substance, and words accidents,Accidents are only a means, substance is the final cause.How long wilt thou dwell on words and superficialities?A burning heart is what I want; consort with burning!Kindle in thy heart the flame of love,And burn up utterly thoughts and fine expressions.O Moses! the lovers of fair rites are one class,They whose hearts and souls burn with love are another.Lovers must burn every moment,As tax and tithe are levied on a ruined village.If they speak amiss, call them not sinners;If a martyr be stained with blood, wash it not away.Blood is better than water for martyrs,This fault is better than a thousand correct forms.No need to turn to the Ka’ba when one is in it,And divers have no need of shoes.One does not take a drunken man as a guide on the way,Nor speak of darns to torn garments.The sect of lovers is distinct from all others,Lovers have a religion and a faith of their own.Though the ruby has no stamp, what matters it?Love is fearless in the midst of the sea of fear.Beware, if thou offerest praises or thanksgivings,And know them to be even as the babble of that shepherd;Though thy praises be better compared with his,Yet in regard to God they are full of defects.How long wilt thou say, ‘They obscure the truth,For it is not such as they fancy’?Thy own prayers are accepted only through mercy,They are suffered as the prayers of an impure woman.If her prayers are made impure by the flow of blood,Thine are stained with metaphors and similitudes.Blood is impure, yet its stain is removed by water;But that impurity of ignorance is more lasting,Seeing that without the blessed water of GodIt is not banished from the man who is subject to it.O that thou wouldst turn thy face to thy own prayers,And become cognizant of the meaning of thy ejaculations,And say, ‘Ah! my prayers are as defective as my being;O requite me good for evil!’”Moses questions God as to the reason ofthe flourishing state of the wicked.Moses said, “O beneficent Creator,With whom a moment’s remembrance is as long ages,I see Thy plan distorted in this world of earth and water;My heart, like the angel’s, feels a difficulty thereat.With what object hast thou framed this plan,And sowed therein the seeds of evil?Why hast Thou kindled the fire of violence and wrong?Why burnt up mosques and them who worship therein?Paradise is attached to requirements unpleasant to us,Hell is attached to things flattering our lusts.The branch full of sap is the main fuel of thy fire.‘They that are burnt with fire are near to Kausar.’ 3Whoso is in prison and acquainted with troubles,That is in requital for his gluttony and lusts.Whoso is in a palace and enjoying wealth,That is in reward for toils and troubles.Whoso is seen enjoying uncounted gold and silver,Know that he strove patiently to acquire it.He, whose soul is exempt from natural conditions,And who possesses the power of overriding causes,Can see without causes, like eyes that pierce night;But thou, who art dependent on sense attend to causes.Having left Jesus, thou cherishest an ass (lust),And art perforce excluded, like an ass;The portion of Jesus is knowledge and wisdom,Not so the portion of an ass, O asinine one!Thou pitiest thine ass when it complains;So art thou ignorant, thy ass makes thee asinine.Keep thy pity for Jesus, not for the ass,Make not thy lust to vanquish thy reason.Leave thy natural lusts to whine and howl,Tear thee from them, escape that snare of the soul! 
NOTES: 
Koran lxvii. 30.2. A tradition.3. A saying of the Prophet. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY VIII. The Man who made a Pet of a Bear. 
1 A kind man, seeing a serpent overcoming a bear, went to the bear’s assistance, and delivered him from the serpent. The bear was so sensible of the kindness the man had done him that he followed him about wherever he went, and became his faithful slave, guarding him from everything that might annoy him. One day the man was lying asleep, and the bear, according to his custom, was sitting by him and driving off the flies. The flies became so persistent in their annoyances that the bear lost patience, and seizing the largest stone he could find, dashed it at them in order to crush them utterly; but unfortunately the flies escaped, and the stone lighted upon the sleeper’s face and crushed it. The moral is, “Do not make friends with fools.” In the course of this story occur anecdotes of a blind man, of Moses rebuking the worshippers of the calf, and of the Greek physician Galen and a madman. 
He who needs mercy finds it.Doing kindness is the game and quarry of good men,A good man seeks in the world only pains to cure.Wherever there is a pain there goes the remedy,Wherever there is poverty there goes relief.Seek not water, only show you are thirsty,That water may spring up all around you.That you may hear the words, “The Lord gives them to drink,” 2Be athirst! Allah knows what is best for you.Seek you the water of mercy? Be downcast,And straightway drink the wine of mercy to intoxication.Mercy is called down by mercy to the last.Withhold not, then, mercy from any one, O son!If of yourself you cannot journey to the Ka’ba,Represent your helplessness to the Reliever.Cries and groans are a powerful means,And the All-Merciful is a mighty nurse.The nurse and the mother keep excusing themselves,Till their child begins to cry.In you too has God created infant needs;When they cry out, their milk is brought to them;God said, “Call on God;” continue crying,So that the milk of His love may boil uMoses and the worshipper of the calf.Moses said to one of those full of vain imaginations,“O malevolent one, through error and heresyYou entertain a hundred doubts as to my prophethood,Notwithstanding these proofs, and my holy character.You have seen thousands of miracles done by me,Yet they only multiply your doubts and cavils.Through doubts and evil thoughts you are in a strait,You speak despitefully of my prophethood.I brought the host out of the Red Sea before all men,That ye might escape the oppression of the Egyptians.For forty years meat and drink came from heaven,And water sprang from the rock at my prayer.My staff became a mighty serpent in my hand,Water became blood for my ill-conditioned enemy.The staff became a snake, and my hand bright as the sun;From the reflection of that light the sun became a star.Have not these incidents, and hundreds more like them,Banished these doubts from you, O cold-hearted one?The calf lowed through magic,And you bowed down to it, saying, ‘Thou art my God.’ 4The golden calf lowed; but what did it say,That the fools should feel all this devotion to it?You have seen many more wondrous works done by me,But where is the base man who accepts the truth?What is it that charms vain men but vanity?What else pleases the foolish but folly?Because each kind is charmed by its own kind,Does a cow ever seek the lion?Did the wolf show love to Joseph, 5Or only fraud upon fraud with a view to devour him?True, if it lose his wolf-like nature it becomes a friend;Even as the dog of the cave became a son of man. 6When good Abu Bakr saw Muhammad,He recognized his truth, saying, ‘This one is true;’When Abu Bakr caught the perfume of Muhammad,He said, ‘This is no false one.’But Abu Jahl, who was not one of the sympathizers,Saw the moon split asunder, yet believed not.If from a sympathizer, to whom it is well known,I withhold the truth, still ’tis not hidden from him;But he who is ignorant and without sympathy,However much I show him the truth, he sees it not.The mirror of the heart must needs be polishedBefore you can distinguish fair and foul therein.” 
NOTES: 
Anwari Suhaili, i. 27.2. Koran lxxvi. 21.3. Koran xvii. 110.4. See Koran xx. 90.5. Koran xii. 17.6. Koran xviii. 17. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY IX. The Gardener and the Three Friends. 
A voice came from heaven to Moses, saying, “O Moses why didst thou not visit me when I was sick?” Moses inquired the meaning of this dark saying, and the answer was, “When one of God’s saints is sick, God regards his sickness as His own; and, therefore, he who desires to hold companionship with God must not forsake the saints.” 1 This is illustrated by a story of a gardener who saw three friends walking in his garden, and making free with his fruit. Knowing he could not prevail against them while they remained united, he contrived by tricks to separate them, and then proceeded to chastise them one by one. And this caused one of them to make the reflection that he had acted very foolishly in deserting his friends.
NOTES: 
Cp. Matthew xxv. 40. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY X. Bayazid and the Saint. 
The celebrated Sufi, Abu Yazid or Bayazid of Bastam, in Khorasan, who lived in the third century of the Flight, was once making a pilgrimage to Mecca, and visiting all the “Pillars of insight” who lived m the various towns that lay on his route. At last he discovered the “Khizr of the age” in the person of a venerable Darvesh, with whom he held the following conversation:The Sage said, “Whither are you going, O Bayazid?Where will you bring your caravan to a halt?”Bayazid replied, “At dawn I start for the Ka’ba.”Quoth the Sage, “What provision for the way have you?”He answered, “I have two hundred silver dirhams;See them tied up tightly in the corner of my cloak.”The Sage said, “Circumambulate me seven times;Count this better than circumambulating the Ka’ba;And as for the dirhams, give them to me, O liberal one,And know you have finished your course and obtained your wish,You have made the pilgrimage and gained the life to come,You have become pure, and that in a moment of time.Of a truth that is God which your soul sees in me,For God has chosen me to be His house.Though the Ka’ba is the house of His grace and favors,Yet my body too is the house of His secret.Since He made that house He has never entered it,But none but That Living One enters this house;When you have seen me you have seen God,And have circumambulated the veritable Ka’ba.To serve me is to worship and praise God;Think not that God is distinct from me.Open clear eyes and look upon me,That you may behold the light of God in a mortal.Tho Beloved once called the Ka’ba ‘My house,’But has said to me ‘O my servant’ seventy times;O Bayazid, you have found the Ka’ba,You have found a hundred precious blessings.”Bayazid gave heed to these deep sayings,And placed them as golden earrings in his ears. 
Then follow anecdotes of the Prophet paying a visit to one of his disciples who lay sick, of Shaikh Bahlol, nicknamed “The Madman,” who was a favorite at the court of Harunu-’r-Rashid, and of the people of Moses.The sweet uses of adversity. 
The sick man said, “Sickness has brought me this boon.That this Prince (Muhammad) has come to me this morn,So that health and strength may return to meFrom the visit of this unparalleled King.O blessed pain and sickness and fever!O welcome weariness and sleeplessness by night!Lo! God of His bounty and favorHas sent me this pain and sickness in my old age;He has given me pain in the back, that I may not failTo spring up out of my sleep at midnight;That I may not sleep all night like the cattle,God in His mercy has sent me these pains.At my broken state the pity of kings has boiled up,And hell is put to silence by their threats!”Pain is a treasure, for it contains mercies;The kernel is soft when the rind is scraped off.O brother, the place of darkness and coldIs the fountain of life and the cup of ecstasy.So also is endurance of pain and sickness and disease.For from abasement proceeds exaltation.The spring seasons are hidden in the autumns,And autumns are charged with springs; flee them not.Consort with grief and put up with sadness,Seek long life in your own death!Since ’tis bad, whatever lust says on this matterHeed it not, its business is opposition.But act contrary thereto, for the prophetsHave laid this injunction upon the world. 2Though it is right to take counsel in affairs,That you may have less to regret in the upshot;The prophets have labored muchTo make the world revolve on this pivot stone; 3But, in order to destroy the people, lust desiresTo make them go astray and lose their heads;The people say, ‘With whom shall we take counsel?’The prophets answer, ‘With the reason of your chief.’Again they say, ‘Suppose a child or a woman enter,Who lacks reason and clear judgment; ‘They reply, ‘Take counsel with them,And act contrary to what they advise.’Know your lust to be woman, and worse than woman;Woman is partial evil, lust universal evil.If you take counsel with your lust,See you act contrary to what that base one advises.Even though it enjoin prayers and fasting,It is treacherously laying a snare for you.’You must abandon and ignore your own knowledge,And dip your hand in the dish of abnegation of knowledge.Whatever seems profitable, flee from it,Drink poison and spill the water of life.Contemn whatever praises you,Lend to paupers your wealth and profits!Quit your sect and be a subject of aversion,Cast away name and fame and seek disgrace!”God the Author of good and evil.If you seek the explanation of God’s love and favor,In connection therewith read the chapter “Brightness.” 4And if you say evil also proceeds from Him,Yet what damage is that to His perfection?To send that evil is one of His perfections.I will give you an illustration, O arrogant one;The heavenly Artist paints His pictures of two sorts,Fair pictures and pictures the reverse of fair.Joseph he painted fair and made him beautiful;He also painted ugly pictures of demons and ‘afrits.Both sorts of pictures are of His workmanship,They proceed not from His imperfection, but His skill,That the perfection of His wisdom may be shown,And the gainsayers of His art be put to shame.Could He not paint ugly things He would lack art,And therefore He creates Guebers as well as Moslems.Thus, both infidelity and faith bear witness to Him,Both alike bow down before His almighty sway.But know, the faithful worship Him willingly,For they seek and aim at pleasing Him;While Guebers worship Him unwillingly,Their real aim and purpose being quite otherwise.Evil itself is turned into good for the good.The Prophet said to that sick man,“Pray in this wise and allay your difficulties;‘Give us good in the house of our present world,And give us good in the house of our next world. 5Make our path pleasant as a garden,And be Thou, O Holy One, our goal!’”The faithful will say on the last day, “O King!Was not Hell on the route all of us traveled?Did not faithful as well as infidels pass through it?Yet on our way we perceived not the smoke of the fire;Nay, it seemed Paradise and the mansion of the blessed.”Then the King will answer, “That green garden,As it appeared to you on your passage through it,Was indeed Hell and the place of dread torment;Yet for you it became a garden green with trees.Since you have labored to make hellish lusts,And the ‘fire of pride that courts destruction,To make these, I say, pure and clean,And, to please God, have quenched those fires,So that the fire of lust, that erst breathed flame,Has become a holy garden and a guiding light,Since you have turned the fire of wrath to meekness,And the darkness of ignorance to shining knowledge,Since you have turned the fire of greed into bounty,And the vile thorns of malice into a rose-garden;Since you have quenched all these fires of your ownFor my sake, so that those poisons are now pure sweets;Since you have made fiery lust as a verdant garden,And have sowed therein the seed of fidelity,So that nightingales of prayer and praiseEver warble sweetly around this garden;Since you have responded to the call of God,And have drawn water out of the hell of lust,For this cause my hell also, for your behoof,Becomes a verdant garden and yields leaves and fruit.”What is the recompense of well-doing, O son?It is kindness and good treatment and rich requital.Have ye not said, “We are victims,Mere nothings before eternal Being?If we are drunkards or madmen,’Tis that Cup-bearer and that Cup which make us so.We bow down our heads before His edict and ordinance,We stake precious life to gain His favor.While the thought of the Beloved fills our hearts,All our work is to do Him service and spend life for Him.Wherever He kindles His destructive torch,Myriads of lovers’ souls are burnt therewith.The lovers who dwell within the sanctuaryAre moths burnt with the torch of the Beloved’s face.”O heart haste thither, 6 for God will shine upon you,And seem to you a sweet garden instead of a terror.He will infuse into your soul a new soul,So as to fill you, like a goblet, with wine.Take up your abode in His soul!Take up your abode in heaven, O bright full moon!Like the heavenly Scribe,7 He will open your heart’s bookThat He may reveal mysteries unto you.Abide with your Friend, since you have gone astray,Strive to be a full moon; you are now a fragment thereof.Wherefore this shrinking of the part from its whole?Why this association with its foes?Behold Genus become Species in due course,Behold secrets become manifest through his light!So long as woman-like you swallow blandishments,How, O wise man, can you get relief from false flatteries?These flatteries and fair words and deceits (of lust)You take, and swallow, just like women.But the reproaches and the blows of DarveshesAre really better for you than the praises of sinners.Take the light blows of Darveshes, not the honey of sinners,And become, by the fortune of good, good yourself.Because from them the robe of good fortune is gained,In the asylum of the spirit blood becomes life. 
NOTES: 
Alluding to the Hadis: “Heaven and earth contain me not, but the heart of my faithful servant contains me.”2. Freytag quotes a saying of ‘Omar, “A fool may indicate the right course” (Arabum Proverbia, i. ).3. The law defining the right course.4. Koran xciii. : “By the noonday brightness, and by the night when it darkeneth, thy Lord hath not forsaken thee nor been displeased.”5. “O Lord, give us good in this world and good in the next, and save us from the torment of the fire.” (Koran ii. 197).6. i.e., to annihilation of self in God, as a moth in the flame.7. Atarid or Mercury. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY XI. Mo’avia and Iblis. 
Mo’avia, the first of the Ommiad Khalifas, was one day lying asleep in his palace, when he was awakened by a strange man. Mo’avia asked him who he was, and he replied that he was Iblis. Mo’avia then asked him why he had awakened him, and lblis replied that the hour of prayer was come, and he feared Mo’avia would be late. Mo’avia answered, “Nay! it could never have been your intention to direct me in the right way. How can I trust a thief like you to guard my interests?” Iblis answered, “Remember that I was bred up as an angel of light, and that I cannot quite abandon my original occupation. You may travel to Rome or Cathay, but still you retain the love of your fatherland. I still retain my love of God, who fed me when I was young; nay, even though I revolted from Him, that was only from jealousy (of Adam), and jealousy proceeds from love, not from denial of God. I played a game of chess with God at His own desire, and though I was utterly checkmated and ruined, in my ruin I still experience God’s blessings.” 
Mo’avia answered, “What you say is not credible. Your words are like the decoy calls of a fowler, which resemble the voices of the birds, and so lure them to destruction. You have caused the destruction of hundreds of mortals, such as the people of Noah, the tribe of ‘Ad, 1 the family of Lot, Nimrod, Pharaoh, Abu Jahl, and so on.”Iblis retorted, “You are mistaken if you suppose me to be the cause of all the evil you mention. I am not God, that I should be able to make good evil, or fair foul. Mercy and vengeance are twin divine attributes, and they generate the good and evil seen in all earthly things. I am, therefore, not to blame for the existence of evil, as I am only a mirror, which reflects the good and evil existing in the objects presented to it.”Mo’avia then prayed to God to guard him against the sophistries of lblis, and again adjured lblis to cease his arguments and tell plainly the reason why he had awakened him. Iblis, instead of answering, continued to justify himself, saying how hard it was that men and women should blame him when they did anything wrong, instead of blaming their own evil lusts. Mo’avia, in reply, reproached him with concealing the truth, and ultimately brought him to confess that the true reason why he had awakened him was this, that if he had overslept himself, and so missed the hour of prayer, he would have felt deep sorrow and have heaved many sighs, and each of these sighs would, in the sight of God, have counted for as many as two hundred ordinary prayers. 
The value of sighs.A certain man was going into the mosque,Just as another was coming out.He inquired of him what had occurred to the meeting,That the people were coming out of the mosque so soon.The other told him that the ProphetHad concluded the public prayers and mysteries.“Whither go you,” said he, “O foolish one,Seeing the Prophet has already given the blessing?”The first heaved a sigh, and its smoke ascended;That sigh yielded a perfume of his heart’s blood.The other, who came from the mosque, said to him,“Give me that sigh, and take my prayers instead.”The first said, “I give it, and take your prayers.”The other took that sigh with a hundred thanks.He went his way with deep humility and contrition,As a hawk who had ascended in the track of the falcon.That night, as ho lay asleep, he heard a voice from heaven,“Thou hast bought the water of life and healing;The worth of what thou hast chosen and possessedEquals that of all the people’s accepted prayers.” 
To illustrate the treachery of wolves in sheep’s clothing, - of Satans rebuking sin and preaching religion - an anecdote is told of a master of a house who caught a thief, but was induced to let him escape by the stratagem of the thief’s confederate, who cried that he had got the real thief elsewhere. Apropos of the same theme, the poet next relates the story of “those who built a mosque for mischief,” as recorded in the Koran. 2 The tribe of Bani Ganim built a mosque, and invited the Prophet to dedicate it. The Prophet, however, discovered that their real motive was jealousy of the tribe of Bani Amru lbn Auf, and of the mosque at Kuba, near Medina, and a treacherous understanding with the Syrian monk Abu Amir, and therefore he refused their request, and ordered the mosque to be razed to the ground. 
Wisdom the believer’s lost camel.My people adopt my law without obeying it,They take that coin without assaying it.The Koran’s wisdom is like the “believer’s lost camel,’ 3Every one is certain his camel is lost.You have lost your camel and seek it diligently;Yet how will you find it if you know not your own?What was lost? Was it a female camel that you lost?It escaped from your hand, and you are in a maze.The caravan is come to be loaded,Your camel is vanished from the midst of it.You run here and there, your mouth parched with heat;The caravan moves on, and night approaches.Your goods lie on the ground in a dangerous road,You hurry after your camel in all directions.You cry “O Moslems, who has seen a camel,Which escaped from its stable this morning?To him who shall give me news of my camelI will give a reward of so many dirhems.”You go on seeking news of your camel from every one,And every lewd fellow flatters you with a fresh rumor,Saying, “I saw a camel; it went this way;’Twas red, and it went towards this pasture.”Another says, “Its ear was cropped.”Another says, “Its cloth was embroidered.”Another that it had only one eye,Another that it had lost its hair from mange.To gain the reward every base fellowMentions a hundred marks without any foundation.All false doctrines contain an element of truth.Just so every one in matters of doctrineGives a different description of the hidden subject.A philosopher expounds it in one way,And a critic at once refutes his propositions.A third censures both of them;A fourth spends his life in traducing the others.Every one mentions indications of this road,In order to create an impression that he has gone it.This truth and that truth cannot be all true,And yet all of them are not entirely astray in error.Because error occurs not without some truth,Fools buy base coins from their likeness to real coins.If there were no genuine coins current in the world,How could coiners succeed in passing false coins?If there were no truth, how could falsehood exist?Falsehood derives its plausibility from truth.’Tis the desire of right that makes men buy wrong;Let poison be mixed with sugar, and they eat it at once.If wheat were not valued as sweet and good for food,The cheat who shows wheat and sells barley would make no profit!Say not, then, that all these creeds are false,The false ones ensnare hearts by the scent of truth.Say not that they are all erroneous fancies,There is no fancy in the universe without some truth.Truth is the “night of power “ 4 hidden amongst other nights,In order to try the spirit of every night.Not every night is that of power, O youth,Nor yet is every night quite void of power.In the crowd of rag-wearers there is but one Faqir; 5Search well and find out that true one.Tell the wary and discerning believerTo distinguish the king from the beggar.If there were no bad goods in the world,Every fool might be a skilful merchant;For then the hard art of judging goods would be easy.If there were no faults, one man could judge as well as another.Again, if all were faulty, skill would be profitless.If all wood were common, there would be no aloes.He who accepts everything as true is a fool,But he who says all is false is a knave. 
NOTES: 
See Koran xi. 63.2. Koran ix. 108.3. This is a proverb ascribed to Ali. It means, people are always losing wisdom and seeking it like a lost camel (Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, i. ).4. The night on which the Koran was revealed.5. So in the Phaedo, “Many are the wandbearers, but few the Mystics.” 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY XII. The Four Hindustanis who censured one another. 
Four Hindustanis went to the mosque to say their prayers. Each one duly pronounced the Takbir, and was saying his prayers with great devotion, when the Mu’azzin happened to come in. One of them immediately called out, “O Mu’azzin, have you yet called to prayer? It is time to do so.” Then the second said to the speaker, “Ah! you have spoken words unconnected with worship, and therefore, according to the Hadis, you have spoiled your prayers.” 1 Thereupon the third scolded the last speaker, saying, “O simpleton, why do you rebuke him? Rather rebuke yourself.” Last of all, the fourth said, “God be praised that I have not fallen into the same ditch as my three companions.” The moral is, not to find fault with others, but rather, according to the proverb, 2 to be admonished by their bad example. Apropos of this proverb, a story is told of two prisoners captured by the tribe of Ghuz. The Ghuzians were about to put one of them to death, to frighten the other, and make him confess where the treasure was concealed, when the doomed man discovered their object, and said, “O noble sirs, kill my companion, and frighten me instead.”
NOTES: 
Mishkat ul Masabih, by Matthews, i. 205.2. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, i. 628. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY XIII. The Old Man and the Physician. 
An old man complained to his physician that he suffered from headache. The physician replied, “That is caused by old age.” The old man next complained of a defect in his sight, and the physician again told him that his malady was due to old age. The old man went on to say that he suffered from pain in the back, from dyspepsia, from shortness of breath, from nervous debility, from inability to walk, and so on; and the physician replied that each of these ailments was likewise caused by old age. The old man, losing patience, said, “O fool, know you not that God has ordained a remedy for every malady?” The physician answered, “This passion and choler are also symptoms of old age. Since all your members are weak, you have lost the power of self-control, and fly into a passion at every word.” 
Bad principles always produce bad acts.Fools laud and magnify the mosque,While they strive to oppress holy men of heart.But the former is mere form, the latter spirit and truth.The only true mosque is that in the hearts of saints.The mosque that is built in the hearts of the saintsIs the place of worship of all, for God dwells there.So long as the hearts of the saints are not afflicted,God never destroys the nation.Our forefathers lifted their hands against the prophets;Seeing their bodies, they took them for ordinary men.In you also abide the morals of those men of old;How can you avoid fearing that you will act like them?The morals of those unthankful ones dwell in you,Your urn will not always return unbroken from the well.Seeing that all these bad symptoms are seen in you,And that you are one with those men, how can you escape? 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY XIV. The Arab Carrier and the Scholar. 
An Arab loaded his camel with two sacks, filling one with wheat and the second with sand, in order to balance the first. As he was proceeding on his way he met a certain tradition-monger, who questioned him about the contents of his sacks. On learning that one contained nothing but sand, he pointed out that the object might be attained much better by putting half the wheat in one sack and half in the other. On hearing this, the Arab was so struck by his sagacity that he conceived a great respect for him, and mounted him on his camel. Then he said, “As you possess such great wisdom. I presume that you are a king or a Vazir, or at least a very rich and powerful noble.” The theologian, replied, “On the contrary. I am a very poor man; all the riches my learning has brought me are weariness and headaches, and I know not where to look for a loaf of bread.” The Arab said, “In that case get, off my camel and go your way, and suffer me to go mine, for I see your learning brings ill luck.” The moral of the story is the worthlessness of mere human knowledge, and its inferiority to the divine knowledge proceeding from inspiration. This thesis is further illustrated by an account of the mighty works which were done by the saint Ibrahim bin Adham, through the divine knowledge that God had given him. Ibrahim was originally prince of Balkh, but renounced his kingdom and became a saint. One day he was sitting by the shore mending his cloak, when one of his former subjects passed by and marvelled to see him engaged in such a, mean occupation. The saint at once, by inspired knowledge, read his thoughts, and thus corrected his false impressions. He took the needle with which he was mending, his cloak and cast it into the sea. Then with a loud voice he cried out, “O needle rise again from the midst of the sea and come back again into my hands.” Without a moment’s delay thousands of fishes rose to the surface of the sea, each bearing in its mouth a golden needle, and cried out, “O Shaikh, take these needles of God!” Ibrahim then turned to the noble, saying, “Is not the kingdom of the heart better than the contemptible earthly kingdom I formerly possessed? What you have just seen is a very trifling sign of my spiritual power as it were, a mere leaf plucked to show the beauty of a garden. You have now caught the scent of this garden, and it ought to attract your soul to the garden itself, for you must know that scents have great influence, e.g., the scent of Joseph’s coat, 1 which restored Jacob’s sight, and the scents which were loved by the Prophet.” 2
NOTES: 
Koran xii. 93.2. There is a Hedis: “The Prophet loved perfumes and fair women and brightness of eyes in prayer.” 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY XV. The Man who boasted that God did not punish him for his sins, and Jethro’s answer to him. 
That person said in the time of Shu’aib (Jethro),“God has seen many faults done by me;Yea, how many sins and faults of mine has He seen,Nevertheless of His mercy He punishes me not.”God Almighty spake in the ear of Shu’aib,Addressing him with an inner voice in answer thereto,“Why hast thou said I have sinned so much,And God of His mercy has not punished my sins?”Thou sayest the very reverse of the truth, O fool!Wandering from the way and lost in the desert!How many times do I smite thee, and thou knowest not?Thou art bound in my chains from head to foot.On thy heart is rust on rust collected,So thou art blind to mysteries.Thy rust, layer on layer, O black kettle!Makes the aspect of thy inner parts foul.If that smoke touched a new kettle,It would show the smut, were it only as a grain of barley;For everything is made manifest by its opposite,In contrast with its whiteness that black shows foul.But when the kettle is black, then afterwardsWho can see on it the impression of the smoke?If the blackRumi be a negro,His face agrees in color with the smoke.But if a man of Rum does blackRumi’s work,His face becomes grimed by the smoke fumes;Then he quickly perceives the impression of his fault,So that he wails and cries ‘O Allah!’When he is stubborn and follows his evil practices,He casts dust in the eyes of his discernment.He recks not of repentance, and, moreover, that sinBecomes dear to his heart, so that he becomes without faith,Old shame for sin and calling on God quit him,Rust five layers deep settles on his mirror,Rust spots begin to gnaw his iron,The color in his jewel grows less and less.When you write on white paper,What is written is read at a glance;But when you write on the face of a written page,It is not plain, reading it is deceptive;For that black is written on the top of other black,Both the writings are illegible and senseless.Or if, in the third place, you write on the page,And then blacken it like an infidel’s soul,Then what remedy but the aid of the Remedier?Despair is copper and sight its elixir.Lay your despair before Him,That you may escape from pain without medicine.”When Shu’aib spoke these aphorisms to him,From that breath of the soul roses bloomed in his heart,His soul heard the revelations of heaven;He said, “If He has punished me, where is the sign of it?”Shu’aib said, “O Lord, he repels my arguments,He seeks for a sign of that punishment.”The Veiler of sins replied, “I will tell him no secrets,Save only one, in order to try him.One sign that I punish him is this,That he observes obedience and fasting and prayer,And devotions and almsgiving, and so on,Yet never feels the least expansion of soul.He performs the devotions and acts enjoined by law,Yet derives not an atom of relish from them.Outward devotion is sweet to him, spirit is not sweet,Nuts in plenty, but no kernel in any of them.Relish is needed for devotions to bear fruit,Kernels are needed that seeds may yield trees.How can seeds without kernels become trees?Form without soul (life) is only a dream.” 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY XVI. The Gluttonous Sufi. 
In a certain convent there lived a Sufi whose conduct gave just offence to the brethren. They brought him before their Shaikh and thus accused him, “This Sufi has three very bad qualities; he babbles exceedingly like a bell, at his meals he eats more than twenty men and when he sleeps he is as one of the Seven Sleepers.” The Shaikh then admonished him, insisting on the obligation of keeping to the golden mean; and reminding him that even the prophet Moses 1 was once rebuked by Khizr for speaking to excess. But the delinquent excused himself on the grounds that the mean is relative, what is excess in one man being moderation in another, that he who is led by the spirit is no longer subject to the outward law, and that, the “inner voice,” which rules such an one s conduct, is its own evidence.The mean is relative. 
He said, “Though the path of the mean is wisdom,Yet is this same mean also relative.The water which is insufficient for a camelIs like an ocean to a mouse.Whoso has four loaves as his daily allowance,Whether he eat two or three, he observes the mean.But if he eat all four he transgresses the mean,A very slave to greed, and voracious as a duck.Whoso has an appetite for ten loaves,Know, though he eat six, he observes the mean.If I have an appetite for fifty loaves,While you can manage only six, we are not on a par.You are wearied with ten prostrations in prayer,Whilst I can endure five hundred.Such an one goes barefoot to the Ka’ba,Whilst another faints with going to the mosque.”The ecstatic state which exalts the subject of it above law.“At times my state resembles a dream,My dreaming seems to them infidelity.Know my eyes sleep, but my heart is awake;My body, though torpid, is instinct with energy.The Prophet said, ‘Mine eyes sleep,But my heart is awake with the Lord of mankind.’Your eyes are awake and your heart fast asleep,My eyes are closed, and my heart at the ‘open door.’My heart has other five senses of its own;These senses of my heart view the two worlds.Let not a weakling like you censure me,What, seems night to you is broad day to me;What seems a prison to you is a garden to me.Busiest occupation is rest to me.Your feet are in the mire, to me, mire is rose,What to you is funeral wailing is marriage drum to me.While I seem on earth, abiding with you in the house,I ascend like Saturn to the seventh heaven.’Tis not I who companion with you, ’tis my shadow;My exaltation transcends your thoughts,Because I have transcended thought,Yea, I have sped beyond reach of thought.I am lord of thought, not overlorded by thought,As the builder is lord of the building.All creatures are enslaved to thought;For this cause are they sad at heart and sorrowful.I send myself on an embassy to thought,And, at will, spring back again from thought.I am as the bird of heaven and thought as the fly,How can the fly lend a helping hand to me?Whoso has in him a spark of the light of Omnipotence,However much he eats, say ‘ Eat on;’ ’tis lawful to him.”To the spiritual man the “inner voice” is itsown evidence, and needs no other proof.“If you are a true lover of my soul,This truth-fraught saying of mine is no vain pretence,‘Though I talk half the night I am superior to you;’And again, ‘Fear not the night; here am I, your kinsman.’These two assertions of mine will both seem true to youThe moment you recognize the voice of your kinsman.Superiority and kinsmanship are both mere assertions,Yet both are recognized for truth by men of clear wit.The nearness of the voice proves to such an oneThat the voice proceeds from a friend who is near.The sweetness of the kinsman’s voice, too, O beloved,Proves the veracity of that kinsman.But the uninspired fool who from ignoranceCannot tell the voice of a stranger from a friend’s,To him the friend’s saying seems a vain pretension,His ignorance is the material cause of his disbelief.To the wise, whose hearts are enlightened,The mere sound of that voice proves its truth.”“When you say to a thirsty man, ‘Come quickly;This is water in the cup, take and drink it,’Does the thirsty man say, ‘This is a vain pretension;Go, remove yourself from me, O vain pretender,Or proceed to give proofs and evidenceThat this is generic water, and concrete water thereof’?Or when a mother cries to her sucking babe,‘Come, O son, I am thy mother,’Does the babe answer, ‘O mother, show a proofThat I shall find comfort from taking thy milk’?In the hearts of every sect that has a taste of the truthThe sight and the voice of prophets work miracles.When the prophets raise their cry to the outward ear,The souls of each sect bow in devotion within;Because never in this world hath the soul’s earHeard from any man the like of that cry.That poor man in that strange sweet voiceRecognizes the voice of God, ‘Verily I am nigh.’” 2 
NOTES: 
Koran xviii. 77.2. “And when my servants ask thee concerning me then will I be nigh unto them. I will answer the cry of him that crieth, when he crieth unto me.” (Koran ii. l82). 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY XVII. The Tree of Life. 
The preceding story is followed by a short anecdote of the infants of the Virgin Mary and the mother of John the Baptist leaping in their mothers’ wombs, 1 and in reply to matter of fact cavillers and questioners of this anecdote, the poet says we must look at its spirit and essential basis rather than its outward form. This introduces the story of the tree of life. A certain wise man related that in Hindustan there was a tree of such wonderful virtue that whosoever ate of its fruit lived forever. Hearing this, a king deputed one of his courtiers to go in quest of it. The courtier accordingly proceeded to Hindustan, and traveled all over that country, inquiring of every one he met where this tree was to be found. Some of these persons professed their entire ignorance, others joked him, and others gave him false information; and, finally, he had to return to his country with his mission unaccomplished. He then, as a last resource, betook himself to the sage who had first spoken of the tree, and begged for further information about it, and the sage replied to him as follows: 
The Shaikh laughed, and said to him, “O friend,This is the tree of knowledge, O knowing one;Very high, very fine, very expansive,The very water of life from the circumfluent ocean.Thou hast run after form, O ill-informed one,Wherefore thou lackest the fruit of the tree of substance.Sometimes it is named tree, sometimes sun,Sometimes lake, and sometimes cloud.’Tis one, though it has thousands of manifestations;Its least manifestation is eternal life!Though ’tis one, it has a thousand manifestations,The names that fit that one are countless.That one is to thy personality a father,In regard to another person He may be a son.In relation to another He may be wrath and vengeance,In relation to another, mercy and goodness.He has thousands of names, yet is One,Answering to all of His descriptions, yet indescribable.Every one who seeks names, if he is a man of credulity,Like thee, remains hopeless and frustrated of his aim.Why cleavest thou to this mere name of tree,So that thou art utterly balked and disappointed?Pass over names and look to qualities,So that qualities may lead thee to essence!The differences of sects arise from His names;When they pierce to His essence they find His peace!” 
This story is followed by another anecdote illustrative of the same thesis that attending merely to names and outward forms, rather than to the spirit and essence of religion, leads men into error and delusion. Four persons, a Persian, an Arab, a Turk, and a Greek, were traveling together, and received a present of a dirhem. The Persian said he would buy “angur” with it, the Arab said he would buy “inab,” while the Turk and the Greek were for buying “uzum” and “astaphil” (staphyle), respectively. Now all these words mean one and the same thing, viz. “grapes;” but, owing to their ignorance of each other’s languages, they fancied they each wanted to buy something different, and accordingly a violent quarrel arose between them. At last a wise man who knew all their languages came up and explained to them that they were all wishing for one and the same thing. 
NOTES: 
Luke i. 41. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY XVIII. The Young Ducks who were brought up under a Hen. 
Although a domestic fowl may have taken thee,Who art a duckling, under her wing and nurtured thee,Thy mother was a duck of that ocean.Thy nurse was earthy, and her wing dry land.The longing for the ocean which fills thy heart,That natural longing of thy soul comes from thy mother.Thy longing for dry land comes to thee from thy nurse;Quit thy nurse, for she will lead thee astray.Leave thy nurse on the dry land and push on,Enter the ocean of real Being, like the ducks!Though thy nurse may frighten thee away from water,Do thou fear not, but haste on into the ocean!Thou art a duck, and flourishest on land and water,And dost not, like a domestic fowl, dig up the house.Thou art a king of “the sons of Adam honored by God,” lAnd settest foot alike on sea and land;For impress on thy mind, “We have carried them by sea,”Before the words, “We have carried them by land.”The angels go not on dry land,And the animals know nothing of the sea;Thou in body art an animal, in thy soul an angel;Hence thou goest both upon earth and on heaven.”Hence to outward view “He is a man like you,” 2While to his sharp-seeing heart “it hath been revealed.”His earthy form has fallen on earth,His spirit revolving above highest heaven.O boy, we are all of us waterfowl,The sea knows full well our language.Solomon 3 is, as it were, that sea, and we as the birds;In Solomon we hold our course to eternity.Along with Solomon plunge into the ocean, 4Then, like David, the water will make us coats-of-mail.That Solomon is present to every one,But negligence closes their eyes and bewitches them.Hence, through ignorance, sloth, and folly,Though he stands hard by us, we are shut off from him.The noise of thunder makes the head of the thirsty ache;When he knows not that it unlocks the blessed showers,His eyes are fixed on the running stream,Unwitting of the sweetness of the rain from heaven.He urges the steed of his desire towards the caused,And perforce remains shut off from the Causer.Whoso beholds the Causer face to face,How can he set his heart on things caused on earth? 
NOTES: 
Koran xvi. 72: “And now have we honored the sons of Adam, by sea and by land have we carried them.”2. Koran xviii. 110: “Say, in sooth I am only a man like you. It hath been revealed unto me that your God is one only God.”3. Koran xxvii. 16: “Solomon said, O men, we have been taught the speech of birds.”4. Koran xxvii. 44 and xxi. 80. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





BOOK III. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY I. The Travelers who ate the Young Elephant. 
A PARTY of travelers lost their way in a wilderness, and were well nigh famished with hunger. While they were considering what to do, a sage came up and condoled with them on their unfortunate plight. He told them that there were many young elephants in the adjacent woods, one of which would furnish them an ample meal, but at the same time he warned them that if they killed one, its parents would in all probability track them out and be revenged on them for killing their offspring. Shortly after the travelers saw a plump young elephant, and could not resist killing and eating it. One alone refrained. Then they lay down to rest; but no sooner were they fast asleep than a huge elephant made his appearance and proceeded to smell the breath of each one of the sleepers in turn. Those whom he perceived to have eaten of the young elephant’s flesh he slew without mercy, sparing only the one who had been prudent enough to abstain.: God’s care for His children. 
O son, the pious are God’s children,Absent or present He is informed of their state.Deem Him not absent when they are endangered,For He is jealous for their lives.He saith, “These saints are my children,Though remote and alone and away from their Lord.For their trial they are orphans and wretched,Yet in love I am ever holding communion with them.Thou art backed by all my protection;My children are, as it were, parts of me.Verily these Darveshes of mineAre thousands on thousands, and yet no more than One;For if not, how did Moses with one magic staffTurn the realm of Pharaoh upside down?And if it were not so, how did Noah with one curseMake East and West alike drowned in his flood?Nor could one prayer of eloquent LotHave razed their strong city against their will,Their mighty city, like to Paradise,Became as a Tigris of black water; go, see its vestige!Towards Syria is this vestige and memorial,Thou seest it in passing on the way to Jerusalem.Thousands of God-fearing prophetsIn every age hold divine chastisements in hand.Should I tell of them my limits would be exceeded,And not hearts only but very hills would bleed.”Evil deeds give men’s prayers an ill savour in Gods nostrils.Thou art asleep, and the smell of that forbidden fruitAscends to the azure skies,Ascends along with thy foul breath,Till it overpowers heaven with stench;Stench of pride, stench of lust, stench of greed.All these stink like onions when a man speaks.Though thou swearest, saying, “When have I eaten?Have I not abstained from onions and garlic?”The very breath of that oath tells tales,As it strikes the nostrils of them that sit with thee.So too prayers are made invalid by such stenches, 1That crooked heart is betrayed by its speech.The answer to that prayer is, “Be ye driven into hell,” 2The staff of repulsion is the reward of all deceit.But, if thy speech be crooked and thy meaning straight,Thy crookedness of words will be accepted of God.That faithful Bilal, when he called to prayer,Would devoutly cry, “Come hither, come hither!”At last men said, “O Prophet, this call is not right,This is wrong; now, what is thy intention?O Prophet, and O ambassador of the Almighty,Provide another Mu’azzin of better talent.’Tis an error at the beginning of our divine worshipTo utter the words, ‘Come to the asylum!’” 3The wrath of the Prophet boiled up, and he said(Uttering one or two secrets from the fount of grace),“O base ones, in God’s sight the ‘Ho!’ of BilalIs better than a hundred ‘Come hithers’ and ejaculations.Ah! excite not a tumult, lest I tell forth openlyYour secret thoughts from first to last.If ye keep not your breath sweet in prayer,Go, desire a prayer from the Brethren of Purity!”For this cause spake God to Moses,At the time he was asking aid in prayer,“O Moses! desire protection of meWith a mouth that thou hast not sinned withal.”Moses answered, “I possess not such a mouth.”God said, “Call upon me with another mouth!Act so that all thy mouthsBy night and by day may be raising prayers.When thou hast sinned with one mouth,With thy other mouth cry, ‘O Allah!’Or else cleanse thy own mouth,And make thy spirit alert and quick.Calling on God is pure, and when purity approaches,Impurity arises and takes its departure.Contraries flee away from contraries;When day dawns night takes flight.When the pure name (of God) enters the mouth,Neither does impurity nor that impure mouth remain!”The man whose calling “O Allah” was equivalentto God’s answering him, “Here am I” 4. 
That person one night was crying, “O Allah!”That his mouth might be sweetened thereby,And Satan said to him, “Be quiet, O austere one!How long wilt thou babble, O man of many words?No answer comes to thee from nigh the throne,How long wilt thou cry ‘Allah’ with harsh face?”That person was sad at heart and hung his head,And then beheld Khizr present before him in a vision,Who said to him, “Ah! thou hast ceased to call on God,Wherefore repentest thou of calling upon Him?”The man said, “The answer ‘Here am I’ came not,Wherefore I fear that I am repulsed from the door.”Khizr replied to him, “God has given me this command;Go to him and say, ‘O much-tried one,Did not I engage thee to do my service?Did not I engage thee to call upon me?That calling ‘Allah’ of thine was my ‘Here am I,’And that pain and longing and ardour of thine my messenger;Thy struggles and strivings for assistanceWere my attractions, and originated thy prayer.Thy fear and thy love are the cove,rt of my mercy,Each ‘O Lord!’ of thine contains many ‘Here am I’s.”The soul of fools is alien from this calling on God,Because it is not their wont to cry, ‘O Lord!’On their mouths and hearts are locks and bonds, 5That they may not cry to God in time of distress.God gave Pharaoh abundance of riches and wealth,So that he boasted that he was ‘Lord Supreme.’In the whole of his life he suffered no headache,So that he never cried to God, wretch that he was.God granted him the absolute dominion of the world,But withheld from him pain and sorrow and cares;Because pain and sorrow and loads of caresAre the lot of God’s friends in the world.Pain is better than the dominion of the world,So that thou mayest call on God in secret.The cries of those free from pain are dull and cold,The cries of the sorrowful come from the burning hearts.” 
NOTES: 
“Whoever eats garlic or onions must keep away from me or from the Masjid.” (Mishkat ut Masabih, ii. 321).2. Koran xxiii. 110: “He will say ‘Be ye driven down into it, and address me not.’”3. Rules for the call to prayer are given in Mishkat ul Masabih i. 141.4. Or, “What dost thou require of me?”5. Koran ii. 6. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY II. The Villager who invited the Townsman to visit him. 
A certain villager paid a visit to the town, and there received hospitality from one of the townsmen. At his departure the villager was profuse of thanks, and pressed the townsman to come and see him in his village, and bring his family with him. The townsman hesitated long before accepting his invitation, having doubts as to his sincerity, and remembering the Hadis, “Caution consists in suspecting others.” 1 But after ten years’ solicitation he at length yielded, and set off with his family to the village. On his arrival the villager shut the door in his face, saying that he did not know him, and the townsman had to pass five nights in the cold and rain. At last, exhausted with suffering, he implored the villager to give him shelter, promising to render service in return. The villager granted it on condition that he would protect his garden from the wolves. The townsman accepted this condition, and taking bow and arrows, proceeded to patrol the garden, but, owing to the rain and the darkness, and his own fears, ended by shooting the villager’s pet ass in mistake for a wolf. The villager abused him roundly, saying that he himself would not have taken an ass for a wolf, even on the darkest night. The townsman replied, “If that be so, you are self-convicted of inhumanity, for you must have recognized me, your friend of ten years’ standing, the moment I knocked at your door. As for me, I am ignorant of all but Allah, and, moreover, was unable to see in the darkness; and God has said, ‘No criminality is imputed to the blind.’2 But your blindness in refusing to recognize me was willful, and your claims to humanity are thus proved to be false by the test to which you have been submitted.” 
Jesus healing the sick.The house of ‘Isa was the banquet of men of heart,Ho! afflicted one, quit not this door!From all sides the people ever thronged,Many blind and lame, and halt and afflicted,To the door of the house of ‘Isa at dawn,That with his breath he might heal their ailments.As soon as he had finished his orisons,That holy one would come forth at the third hour;He viewed those impotent folk, troop by troop,Sitting at his door in hope and expectation;He spoke to them, saying, “O stricken ones!The desires of all of you have been granted by God;Arise, walk without pain or affliction,Acknowledge the mercy and beneficence of God!”Then all, as camels whose feet are shackled,When you loose their feet in the road,Straightway rush in joy and delight to the halting-place,So did they run upon their feet at his command.How many afflictions caused by thyself to thyselfHast thou escaped through these princes of the faith?How long that lameness of thine was thy steed!How seldom was thy soul void of sorrow and grief!O careless straggler, bind a rope upon thy feet,Lest thou lose even thine own self!But thy ingratitude and unthankfulnessForget the honey draught thou hast sipped.That road was perforce closed to theeWhen thou didst wound the hearts of the men of heart.Quick! clasp them and ask pardon of them;Like the clouds, shed tears of lamentation,So that their rose-garden may bloom for thee,And their ripe fruits burst open of themselves.Press around that door, be not viler than a dog,If thou wouldest rival the Seven Sleepers’ dog.God’s claims to our gratitude.Whereas want of fidelity is shameful even in dogs,How can it be right in men?God Almighty Himself makes boast of fidelity,Saying, “Who more faithful to his promise than We?” 3Know, infidelity is fidelity to God’s adversary,No one has pre-eminence over the rights of God.The claims of a mother are less than God’s, for He,That bounteous One, made her debtor for thy embryo.He gave thee a form whilst thou wast in her womb,In her womb He gave thee needful rest and nurture.He viewed her as a part united to thee,Then His wisdom separated that united part.God devised a thousand plans and arts,To make thy mother lavish affection upon thee.Wherefore the claims of God predominate over the mother’s,Whoso acknowledges not God’s claims is a fool.He who made mother and breast and milkUnited mother to father also, despise Him not!O Lord, O Ancient of days, Thy mercies,Whether known to us or unknown, are all from Thee!Thou hast commanded, saying, “Remember thy God,”Because God’s claims are never exhausted!Since thou hast been led astray by faithless men,Turn now from thy evil doubts to the opposite mind.I am free from error and all faithlessness;Thou must come to me and rescind evil doubts.Cut off these evil doubts and cast them away,For in the presence of such thou becomest double.Therefore thou hast chosen harsh friends and companions;If I ask where they are thou sayest they are gone.The good friend goes up to highest heaven,Evil friends sink beneath the bottom of the earth,Whilst thou art left alone in the midst, forlorn,Even as the fires left by the departed caravan.”O brave friend, grasp His skirt,Who is removed alike from the world above and below;Who neither, like. Jesus, ascends to heaven,Nor, like Korah, sinks into the earth;Who will abide with thee in the house and abroadWhen thou lackest house and home.He will bring forth peace out of perturbations,And when thou art afllicted will keep His promise.How false pretensions to sanctity aredistinguished from true sanctity.O son, a hundred thousand tests await thee,Whoever thou art who sayest “I am a prince of the gate,”If the vulgar detect not such an one by tests,Yet the skilled wayfarers seek of him a sign.When a man makes pretension to be a tailor,The master places before him a piece of silk,Saying, “Cut out a large head-dress,”And failure in the test leads him to the pillory.If all the evil men were not tested,Every catamite would through fraud pass for a Rustam.Suppose he wears the semblance of one clad in mail,Yet when wounded he is at once taken captive.The God-intoxicated are not sobered by old age,They remain beside themselves till the last trump.The wine of God is true, and not false,But thou hast drunk only sour whey.Thou makest thyself out to be a Junaid or a Bayazid;Go! for do I not know a hatchet from a ploughshare?O plotter, how canst thou conceal by fraudBaseness, sloth, covetousness, and lust?Thou holdest thyself out as a lover of God,But thou hast coquetted with the evil demon.The lover and the beloved on the last dayWill be joined together and raised in sight of all.How foolish and silly thou hast made thyself!Thou hast drunk blood of grapes, nay, my blood!Go! for I know thee not. Get away!I am a lover beside himself, whose words are wild.Thou fanciest thyself near to God,Saying, “The maker of the dish is not far from the dish.”Knowest thou not that the nearness of saints to GodInvolves the power to do mighty works and signs?Iron was as wax in the hands of David,Wax in thy hands is as iron.God’s nearness and His beneficence are common to all,But only eminent saints enjoy inspired love.Nearness is of various kinds, O son,The sun shines alike on rocks and on gold.Yet the sun possesses a nearness to gold,Whereof the common willow has no cognizance.The dry branch and the green are alike near the sun,Does the sun veil himself from either?Yet what is the nearness of that green branch,Wherefrom thou eatest ripe fruits?But as for the dry branch) from its nearness to the sun,What does it but more quickly grow dry and sapless?Be not intoxicated after the manner of this branch,Which, when it becomes sober, has cause for repentance,But, like those drunkards who, when they drink wine,Bear ripe fruits of wisdom of penitence. 
NOTES: 
Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, i. , ascribes this saying to the poet, Aqzam bin zaid.2. Koran xxiv. 60.3. Koran. ix. 112. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY III. The Jackal who pretended to be a Peacock. 
A jackal fell into a dye-pit, and his skin was dyed of various colors. Proud of his splendid appearance, he returned to his companions, and desired them to address him as a peacock. But they proceeded to test his pretensions, saying, “Dost thou scream like a peacock, or strut about gardens as peacocks are wont to do?” And he was forced to admit that he did not, whereupon they rejected his pretensions. Another story, also on the subject of false pretenders, follows. A proud man who lacked food procured a skin full of fat, greased his beard and lips with it, and called on his friends to observe how luxuriously he had dined. But his belly was vexed at this, because it was hungry, and he was destroying his chance of being invited to dinner by his friends. So the belly cried to God, and a cat came and carried off the skin of fat, and so the man’s false pretences were exposed. The poet takes occasion to point out that Pharaoh’s pretensions to divinity exactly resembled the pretensions of this jackal, and adds that all such false pretenders may be detected by the mark noted in the Koran, “Ye shall know them by the strangeness of their speech.” 1 This recalls the story of Harut and Marut, two angels who were very severe on the frailties of mankind, and whom God sent down upon the earth to be tempted, with the result that they both succumbed to the charms of the daughters of men.2
NOTES: 
Koran xlvii. 32.2. Koran ii. 96. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY IV. Moses and Pharaoh. 
Then follows a long account of the birth of Moses, of Pharaoh’s devices to kill him in his infancy, of his education in Pharaoh’s house, of his desiring Pharaoh to let the children of Israel go, and of his contest with the magicians of Egypt, and his victory over them. In the course of the story the following anecdote is narrated:A snake-catcher, who was following his occupation in the mountains, discovered a large snake frozen by the cold, and, imagining it to be dead, he tied it up and took it to Baghdad. There all the idlers of the city flocked together to see it, and the snake, thawed by the warmth of the sun, recovered life, and immediately destroyed the spectators. 
Comparison of fleshly lust to the snake. 
Lust is that snake; How say you it is dead?It is only frozen by the pangs of hunger.If it obtains the state of Pharaoh,So as to command the (frozen) rivers to flow,Straightway it is led to pride like Pharaoh’s,And it plunders the goods of many a Moses and Aaron.Through pressure of want this snake is as a fly,It becomes a gnat through wealth and rank and luxury.Beware, keep that snake in the frost of humiliation,Draw it not forth into the sunshine of ‘Iraq!So long as that snake is frozen, it is well;When it finds release from frost you become its prey.Conquer it and save yourself from being conquered,Pity it not, it is not one who bears affection.For that warmth of the sun kindles its lust,And that bat of vileness flaps its wings.Slay it in sacred war and combat,Like a valiant man will God requite you with union.When that man cherished that snake,That stubborn brute was happy in the luxury of warmth;And of necessity worked destruction, O friend;Yea, many more mischiefs than I have told.If you wish to keep that snake tied upWithout trouble, be faithful, be faithful!But how can base men attain this wish?It requires a Moses to slay serpents;And a hundred thousand men were slain by his serpent,In dire confusion, according to his purpose. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY V. The Elephant in a Dark Room. 
Some Hindoos were exhibiting an elephant in a dark room, and many people collected to see it. But as the place was too dark to permit them to see the elephant, they all felt it with their hands, to gain an idea of what it was like. One felt its trunk, and declared that the beast resembled a water-pipe; another felt its ear, and said it must be a large fan; another its leg, and thought it must be a pillar; another felt its back, and declared the beast must be like a great throne. According to the part which each felt, he gave a different description of the animal. One, as it were, called it “Dal” and another “Alif.” 
Comparison of the sensual eye to the hand of one that felt the elephant. 
The eye of outward sense is as the palm of a hand,The whole of the object is not grasped in the palm.The sea itself is one thing, the foam another;Neglect the foam, and regard the sea with your eyes.Waves of foam rise from the sea night and day,You look at the foam ripples and not the mighty sea.We, like boats, are tossed hither and thither,We are blind though we are on the bright ocean.Ah! you who are asleep in the boat of the body,You see the water; behold the Water of waters!Under the water you see there is another Water moving it,Within the spirit is a Spirit that calls it.Where were Moses and Jesus when that SunShowered down water on the fields sown with corn?Where were Adam and Eve what timeGod Almighty fitted the string to His bow?The one form of speech is evil and defective;The other form, which is not defective, is perfect.If I speak thereof your feet stumble,Yet if I speak not of it, woe be to you!And if I speak in terms of outward form,You stick fast in that same form, O son.You are footbound like the grass in the ground,And your head is shaken by the wind uncertainly.Your foot stands not firmly till you move it,Nay) till you pluck it not up from the mire.When you pluck up your foot you escape from the mire,The way to this salvation is very difficult.When you obtain salvation at God’s hands, O wanderer,You are free from the mire, and go your way.When the suckling is weaned from its nurse,It eats strong meats and leaves the nurse.You are bound to the bosom of earth like seeds,Strive to be weaned through nutriment of the heart.Eat the words of wisdom, for veiled lightIs not accepted in preference to unveiled light.When you have accepted the light, O beloved,When you behold what is veiled without a veil,Like a star you will walk upon the heavens;Nay, though not in heaven, you will walk on high.Keep silence, that you may hear Him speakingWords unutterable by tongue in speech.Keep silence, that you may hear from that SunThings inexpressible in books and discourses.Keep silence, that the Spirit may speak to you;Give up swimming and enter the ark of Noah;Not like Canaan when he was swimming,Who said, “I desire not to enter the ark of Noah passing by.”Noah and his unbelieving son Canaan.Noah cried, “Ho! child, come into the ark and rest,That you be not drowned in the flood, O weak one.” 1Canaan said, “Nay! I have learned to swim,I have lit a torch of my own apart from thy torch.”Noah replied, “Make not light of it, for ’tis the flood of destruction,Swimming with hands and feet avails naught today.The wind of wrath and the storm blow out torches;Except the torch of God, all are extinguished.”He answered “Nay! I am going to that high mountain,For that will save me from all harm.”Noah cried, “Beware, do not so, mountains are now as grass;Except the Friend none can save thee.”He answered, “Why should I listen to thy advice?For thou desirest to make me one of thy flock.Thy speech is by no means pleasing to me,I am free from thee in this world and the next.”Thus the more good advice Noah gave him,The more stubborn refusals he returned.Neither was his father tired of advising Canaan,Nor did his advice make any impression on Canaan;While they were yet talking a violent waveSmote Canaan’s head, and he was overwhelmed.Reconciliatian of the two traditions, “Acquiescence in infidelity is infidelity” and “Whoso acquiesces not in God’s ordinance desires another Lord besides me”.Yesterday an inquirer questioned me,Since he was interested in the foregoing narrative,Saying, “The Prophet, whose words are as a seal,Said, ‘Acquiescence in infidelity is infidelity.’And again, ‘Acquiescence in God’s ordinanceIs incumbent on all true believers.’Infidelity and hypocrisy are not ordained of God;If I acquiesce in them I am at variance with God.And yet, if I acquiesce not, that again is wrong;What way of escape is there from this dilemma? “I said to him, “This infidelity is ordained, not ordinance, 2Though this infidelity is the work of the ordinance.Therefore distinguish the ordinance from the ordained,That thy difficulty may be at once removed.I acquiesce in infidelity so far as it is God’s ordinance,Not so far as it is our evil and foul passions.Infidelity qua ordinance is not infidelity,Call not God an infidel. Set not foot in this place.Infidelity is folly, ordained infidelity wisdom,How can mercy and vengeance be the same?Ugliness of the picture is not ugliness of the painter,Not so, for he erases ugly pictures.The ability of the painter is shown in this,That he can paint both ugly and beautiful pictures.If I should pursue this argument properly,So that questions and answers should be prolonged,The unction of the mystery of love would escape me,The picture of obedience would become another picture.”Bewilderment from intense love of God putsan end to all thinking and argument 3.A certain man whose hair was half gray came in hasteTo a barber who was a friend of his,Saying, “Pluck out the white hairs from my beard,For I have selected a young bride, O my son.The barber cut off his beard and laid it before him,Saying, “Do you part them, the task is beyond me.”Questions are white and answers black; do you choose,For the man of faith knows not how to choose.Thus, one smote Zaid a blow,And Zaid attacked him for his treachery.The striker said, “Let me first ask you a question,Give me an answer to it and then strike me;I struck your back and a bruise appeared,Now I ask you a question in all kindliness,Did this bruise proceed from my hand,Or from the smitten part of your back, O complainer?”Zaid replied, “Through pain I am not in a conditionTo enter upon thought and consideration of this.You, who are free from pain, think this out;Such trifling thoughts occur not to a man in pain.”Men in pain have no time for other thoughts,Whether you enter mosque or Christian church.Your carelessness and injustice suggest thoughtsAnd unprecedented difficulties to your imagination.The man in pain cares only for the faith,He is aware only of man and his work.He set’s God’s command upon his head and face,And for thinking, he puts it aside. 4 
NOTES: 
Koran xi. 44.2. Or “decreed, not decree” (maqzi nai qaza). I confess I do not understand the distinction.3. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 287.4. The four last couplets are omitted in the Bulaq edition. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY VI. The Lover who read Sonnets to his Mistress. 
A lover was once admitted to the presence of his mistress, but, instead of embracing her, he pulled out a paper of sonnets and read them to her, describing her perfections and charms and his own love towards her at length. His mistress said to him, “You are now in my presence, and these lover’s sighs and invocations are a waste of time. It is not the part of a true lover to waste his time in this way. It shows that I am not the real object of your affection, but that what you really love is your own effusions and ecstatic raptures. I see, as it were, the water which I have longed for before me, and yet you withhold it. I am, as it were, in Bulgaria, and the object of your love is in Cathay. One who is really loved is the single object of her lover, the Alpha and Omega of his desires. As for you, you are wrapped up in your own amorous raptures, depending on the varying states of your own feelings, instead of being wrapped up in me.” 
The true mystic must not stop at mere subjective religious emotions, but seek absolute union with God. 1Whoso is restricted to religious raptures is but a man;Sometimes his rapture is excessive, sometimes deficient.The Sufi is, as it were, the “son of the season,”But the pure (Safi) is exalted above season and state.Religious raptures depend on feelings and will,But the pure one is regenerated by the breath of Jesus.You are a lover of your own raptures, not of me;You turn to me only in hope of experiencing raptures.Whoso is now defective, now perfect,Is not adored by Abraham; he is “one that sets.”Because the stars set, and are now up, now down,He loved them not; “I love not them that set.” 2Whoso is now pleasing and now unpleasingIs at one time water, at another fire.He may be the house of the moon, but not the true moon;Or as the picture of a mistress, but not the living one.The mere Sufi is the “ child of the season;”He clings to seasons as to a father,But the pure one is drowned in overwhelming love.A child of any one is never free from season and state.The pure one is drowned in the light cc that is not begotten,”“What begets not and is not begotten” is God. 3Go I seek such love as this, if you are alive;If not, you are enslaved by varying seasons.Gaze not on your own pictures, fair or ugly,Gaze on your love and the object of your desire.Gaze not at the sight of your own weakness or vileness,Gaze at object of your desire, O exalted one. 
NOTES: 
See Gulshan i Raz, I. 850.2. Koran vi. 77.3. Koran cxii. 3. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY VII. The Man who prayed earnestly to be fed without work. 
In the time of the prophet David there was a man who used to pray day and night, saying, “Thou hast created me weak and helpless; give me my daily bread without obliging me to work for it.” The people derided him for making such a foolish petition, but he still persisted, and at last a cow ran into his house of its own accord, and he killed and ate it. This illustrates the saying of the Prophet that God loves earnest petitioners, because He regards the sincerity of the prayer more than the nature of the thing prayed for. All things praise God, but the praises of inanimate things are different from the praises of men, and those of a Sunni different from those of a Compulsionist (Jabri). Each says the other is in the way of error, but none but the truly spiritual man knows the truth. 
Knowledge or conviction, opposed to opinion.Little is known by any one but the spiritual man,Who has in his heart a touchstone of vital truth.The others, hovering between two opinions,Fly towards their nest on a single wing.Knowledge has two wings, opinion only one wing;Opinion is weak and lopsided in its flight.The bird having but one wing quickly drops down,And again flies on two steps or more.This bird of opinion goes on rising and fallingOn one wing, in hope to reach his nest.When he escapes from opinion and knowledge is seen,This bird gains two wings and spreads both of them.Afterwards he “goes upright on a straight path,Not grovelling on his face or creeping.” lHe flies up on two wings even as the angel Gabriel,Free of opinion, of duplicity, and of vain talk.Though the whole world say to him,“Thou art firm in the road of God’s faith,”He is not made more ardent by their saying this,Nor is his lofty soul inclined from its course.And though all say to him, “Thou art in the wrong wayThou thinkest thyself a rock who art but a blade of grass,”He relapses not into opinion at their rebukes,Nor is he vexed at their malevolence.Nay, even if sea and mountains should cry out,Saying, “Thou art mated with error,”He would not relapse one jot into vain imaginations,Nor would he be grieved by the reproaches of his foes. 
NOTES: 
Koran lxvii, 22. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY VIII. The Boys and their Teacher. 
To illustrate the force of imagination or opinion, a story is told of a trick played by boys upon their master. The boys wished to obtain a holiday, and the sharpest of them suggested that when the master came into the school each boy should condole with him on his alleged sickly appearance. Accordingly, when he entered, one said, “O master, how pale you are looking!” and another said, “You are looking very ill today,” and so on. The master at first answered that there was nothing the matter with him, but as one boy after another continued assuring him that he looked very ill, he was at length deluded into imagining that he must really be ill. So he returned to his house, making the boys follow him there, and told his wife that he was not well, bidding her mark how pale he was. His wife assured him he was not looking pale, and offered to convince him by bringing a mirror; but he refused to look at it, and took to his bed. He then ordered the boys to begin their lessons; but they assured him that the noise made his head ache, and he believed them, and dismissed them to their homes, to the annoyance of their mothers. Apropos of the sharpness of the boy who devised this trick, the poet takes occasion to controvert the opinion of the Mu’tazalites, that all m en are born with equal ability, and to express his agreement with the doctrine of the Sunnis, that the innate capacities of men vary very greatly. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY IX. The Darvesh who Broke his Vow. 
There was once a Darvesh who took up his abode in the mountains, in order to enjoy perfect solitude. In that place were many fruit-trees, and the Darvesh made a vow that he would never pluck any of the fruit, but eat only what was shaken down by the wind. For a long time he kept his vow; but a time came when there was no wind, and consequently no fruit was shaken down. The Darvesh was true to his vow for five days, but ho could then endure the pangs of hunger no longer, and he stretched out his hand and plucked some of the fruit from the branches. The reason of this lapse on his part was that he had omitted to say “If God will” when making his vow; and as nothing can be accomplished without God’s aid, ho could not possibly keep his vow. Shortly afterwards the chief of the police visited the mountains in pursuit of a band of robbers, and arrested the Darvesh along with them, and cut off his hand. When he discovered his mistake he apologized very earnestly; but the Darvesh reassured him, saying that men were not to blame, as God had evidently designed to punish him for breaking his vow ‘by depriving him of the hand which had sinned in plucking the fruit. 1 
All things dependent upon the will of God. 
Therefore hath God commanded, “Make an exception,Couple the words ‘If God will’ with your vows. 2Because the governance of actions is in my hands,The wills of all are subject to my will.Every moment I impart a fresh bias to the heart,Every instant I set a fresh mark on the heart;Each day I am engaged in a fresh work, 3There is naught that swerves from my purpose.”There is a tradition, “The heart is like a featherIn the desert, which is borne captive by the winds; 4The wind drives it everywhere at random,Now to right and now to left in opposite directions.”According to another tradition, know the heart is likeTo water in a kettle boiling on the fire.So every moment a fresh purpose occurs to the heart,Not proceeding from itself, but from its situation.Why, then, are you confident about the heart’s purposes?Why make you vows only to be covered with shame?All these changes proceed from the effect of God’s will;Although you see the pit, you cannot avoid it.The strange thing is, not that winged fowlFall into the deadly snare without seeing it,But that they see the snare and the limed twig,And yet fall into it, whether they will or no;Their eyes and ears are open and the snare is in front,Yet they fly into the snare with their own wings!Comparison of the divine decrees to somethingthat is hidden, yet whose effects are seen.Behold that king’s son clad in rags,With bare head and fallen into distress;Consumed by lusts and riotous living,Having sold all his clothes and substance;Having lost house and home, utterly disgraced,Fulfilling the desire of his enemies by his disgrace.If he sees a pious man he cries, “O sir,Aid me, for the love of God;For I have fallen into this dire disgrace;I have squandered goods and gold and wealth.Aid me so that perchance I may escape hence,And extricate myself from this deep slough.”He repeats this prayer to high and low,“ Release me, release me, release me!”His eyes and ears are open, and he is free from bonds,No jailer watches him, no chain binds him;What, then, is the bond from which he asks release?What is the prison from which ho seeks an exit?’Tis the bond of God’s purpose and hidden decrees;Ah! none but the pure in sight can see that bond;Though not visible, that bond exists in concealment;’Tis more stringent than prison or chains of iron,For the mason can pull down prison walls,And blackRumis can break asunder iron chains;But, strange to say, this ponderous hidden bond,BlackRumis are impotent to break this asunder!Ahmad alone could see that bond on Omm Jahil’s back, 5And the rope of palm fiber bound upon her neck;Yea, he saw wood on the back of the wife of Bu Lahab,And she, the bearer of the firewood, said it was heavy.No eye but his saw that rope and that firewood,For to him things unseen were visible.The others explained it, sayingThat Ahmad was beside himself, and they in their senses.Nevertheless from the weight of the load her back bent,And she complained of its weight before him,Saying, “Aid me to escape from this load,And to shake off this grievous burden.”He who sees clearly these indications,Does he not know also the doomed from the elect?Yea, he knows them, yet conceals it by command of God,Since God permits him not to reveal it. 
NOTES: 
cp. Cranmer.2. Koran xviii. 23.3. Koran lv. 29; cp. John v. 17.4. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, vol. iii. .5. See Koran cxi.: Abu Labab, at the instigation of his wife, Omm Jahil, rejected Muhammad’s claim to the prophetic office and Muhammad declared that they should be burned in the fiery flame,” and the wife “laden with firewood, and on her neck a rope of palm fiber.” 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY X. The Old Man who made no Lamentation at the Death of his Sons. 
After short anecdotes of Pharaoh’s magicians, of the mule who complained to the camel that he was always stumbling, and of the prophet Ezra, comes the story of the old man who wept not for the death of his sons.An old man who was noted for sanctity, and who realized the saying of the Prophet, “The ‘ulama of the faith are as the prophets of Israel,” lost all his sons, but showed no grief or regret. His wife therefore rebuked him for his want of feeling, whereupon he replied to her as follows: 
He turned to his wife and said, “O dame,The harvest of December is not as that of July;Though they be dead or though they be living,Are they not equally visible to the eyes of the heart?I behold them clearly before me,Wherefore should I disfigure my countenance like you?Though they have gone forth by revolution of fortune,They are with me still, playing round me.The cause of lamentation is separation or parting,But I am still with my dear ones, and embrace them.Ordinary people may see them in dreams,But I see them clearly, though wide awake.I conceal myself a while from this world,I shake down the leaves of outward sense from the tree.Know, O wife, outward sense is captive to reason,And reason, again, is captive to spirit.Spirit unlooses the chained hands of reason;Yea, it opens all things that are closed.Sensations and thoughts resemble weedsWhich occupy the surface of pure water.The hand of reason puts these weeds aside,And the pure water is then visible to the wise.Weeds in plenty cover the stream like bubbles;When they are swept aside, the water is seen;But when God unlooses not the hands of reason,The weeds on our water grow thick through carnal lust;Yea, they cover up your water more and more,While your lust is smiling and your reason weeping.When fear of God binds the hands of lust,Then God unlooses the two hands of reason.Then the powerful senses are subdued by you,When you submit to reason as your commanderThen your sleepless sense is lulled into sleep,That mysteries may appear to the soul.You behold visions when broad awake,And the gates of heaven are open before you.” 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY XI. Bahlol and the Darvesh. 
The foregoing story is followed by anecdotes of a blind saint who was miraculously enabled to read the Koran, of Luqman and David, and a description of the saints who, mindful of the saying, “Patience is the key of happiness, resign themselves to the dispensations of Providence, and never pray to have them altered. The story of Bahlol and the Darvesh is then given as an example of this resignation to the will of God. Bahlol once paid a visit to a saintly Darvesh, and asked him how he fared. The Darvesh replied, “I fare like a man who directs the course of the world as he wills, to whom death and life are subservient, and whom the stars themselves obey.” Bahlol then pressed him to explain his meaning more clearly, and the Darvesh replied as follows: 
He said, “This at least is notorious to all men,That the world obeys the command of God.Not a leaf falls from a treeWithout the decree and command of that Lord of lords;Not a morsel goes from the mouth down the throatTill God says to it, ‘Go down.’Desire and appetite, which are the reins of mankind,Are themselves subservient to the rule of God.Hear this much, that, whereas the totality of actionsIs not effected without God’s direction,When the decree of God becomes the pleasure of man,Then man desires the fulfillment of God’s decrees;And this too spontaneously, not in hope of reward,But because his very nature is congruous therewith.He desires not even his own life for himself,Nor is he relying on the hope of sweets of life to come.Whatever path is taken by the eternal decree,Whether it be life or death, ’tis all one to him.He lives for the sake of God, not for wealth;He dies for the sake of God, not in fear and grief.His faith is based on his desire to do God’s will,Not on hope to gain paradise with its groves and founts.His avoidance of infidelity is also for God’s sake,It proceeds not from fear of falling into the fire.Thus this temper of his arises from his very nature,Not from any discipline and endeavor of his own.At times he laughs when he contemplates God’s pleasure,God’s decrees are to him as sweetmeats of sugar.I ask, does not the world march agreeably to the willAnd commands of a man rejoicing in this disposition?Why, then, should such a one make prayers and petitions,Saying, ‘O God, change such and such a decree?’His own death and his children’s deathsFor God’s sake seem to him as sweets in the mouth.In the view of that faithful one his children’s deathsAre as sweetmeats to a starving beggar.Why, therefore, should he make prayersUnless he pray for what is pleasing to God?These prayers and petitions, not those of self-pityMake that man to be endued with salvation.He utterly burned up all his self-pity,At the time when he lit the lamp of love to God.His love was the hell that burned up his inclinations;Yea, ho burned up his own inclinations one by one.” 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY XII. The Visions seen by the Saint Daquqi. 
To illustrate the exalted state of identification of the will with the Divine will just described, the poet tells the story of the visions and mighty works of the holy Daquqi. Daquqi was journeying in pious fervor, and in hope to see the splendour of “The Friend” in human shape, the Ocean in a drop of water, and the Sun in an atom, when late one evening he arrived at the seashore. Turning his eyes to heaven, he saw seven great lights never before seen of men, for “God directs whom He will.” 1 Overwhelmed with awe, he watched these lights, and while he still watched them they united into one light. Still more amazed, he watched on, and the single light shortly assumed the likeness of seven men. Afterwards these seven men changed into seven trees; but, strange to say, although crowds of people were passing by, none of them could see these trees, so that Daquqi shared the feelings of the apostles “who lost all hope” (of convincing the world), “and deemed that, they were reckoned as liars.” 2 Possessing his soul in patience, Daquqi still watched on, and saw the seven trees bowing down in prayer, and was reminded of the text, “Plants and trees bend in adoration.” 3 Presently the seven trees again changed into seven men, and Daquqi was appointed to conduct their devotions. While he was yet acting as Imam in front of them, and they were following the prayers he recited, a ship was seen in great distress and all but lost. At Daquqi’s earnest prayer the crew were saved, but straightway vanished from sight; and this led his followers to doubt the reality of the miracle which had just been performed before their eyes. 
Description of a saint whose will was identified with God’s will.That Daquqi possessed a sweet aspect,As a lover of God and a worker of miracles.He resembled the moon of heaven come down on earth,He was as a light to them that walked in darkness.He rarely tarried in one place,And seldom stayed two days in one village.He said, “If I tarry in one house two days,Attachment to that house becomes a passion with me.I guard myself from being deceived into loving a home;Up! Soul, and travel in search of eternal wealth.My heart’s inclination is not satisfied by houses,So that they should be places of temptation for me.”Thus by day he traveled, and by night prayed,His eyes were always gazing on the King as a falcon’s;Cut off from mankind, though not for any fault,Severed from men and women, though not for baseness;Having compassion on mankind, and wholesome as water,A kind intercessor, and one whose prayers were heard.Benevolent to the good and the bad, and a firm ally,Better than a mother, and kinder than a father.The Prophet said, “To you, O blessed ones,I am as a father, affectionate and indulgent;For this cause, that you are all portions of me.”Wherefore should you tear away the parts from the whole?If the part be severed from its whole it is useless;If a limb be rent from the body it dies.Till it is again joined to its whole,’Tis a dead thing, and a stranger to life.Thus Daquqi, in devotions and praises and prayers,Was ever seeking the particular favorites of God.Throughout his long journeys his object was this,To interchange a word with the favorites of God.He cried continually as he went his way,“O Lord, let me draw near to Thy chosen ones!”So Daquqi (the mercy of God be upon him!)Said, “I journeyed long time to East and to West,I journeyed years and months for love of that Moon,Heedless of the way, absorbed in God.With bare feet I trod upon thorns and flints,Seeing I was bewildered, and beside myself, and senseless.Think not my feet touched the earth,For the lover verily travels with the heart.What knows the heart of road and stages?What of distant and near, while it is drunk with love?Distance and nearness are attributes of bodies,The journeys of spirits are after another sort.You journeyed from the embryo state to rationalityWithout footsteps or stages or change of place,The journey of the soul involves not time and place.And my body learnt from the soul its mode of journeying,Now my body has renounced the bodily mode of journeying;It journeys secretly and without form, though under a form.”He added, “One day I was thus filled with longingTo behold in human form the splendours of ‘The Friend,’To witness the Ocean gathered up into a drop,The Sun compressed into a single atom;And when I drew near to the shore of the seaThe day was drawing to a close.”All religions are in substance one and the same.In the adorations and benedictions of righteous menThe praises of all the prophets are kneaded together.All their praises are mingled into one stream,All the vessels are emptied into one ewer.Because He that is praised is, in fact, only One,In this respect all religions are only one religion.Because all praises are directed towards God’s light,Their various forms and figures are borrowed from it.Men never address praises but to One deemed worthy,They err only through mistaken opinions of Him.So, when a light falls upon a wall,That wall is a connecting-link between all its beams;Yet when it casts that reflection back to its source,It wrongly shows great as small, and halts in its praises.Or if the moon be reflected in a well,And one looks down the well, and mistakenly praises it,In reality he is intending to praise the moon,Although, through ignorance, he is looking down the well.The object of his praises is the moon, not its reflection;His infidelity arises from mistake of the circumstances.That well-meaning man goes wrong through his mistake;The moon is in heaven, and he fancies it in the well.By these false idols mankind are perplexed,And driven by vain lusts to their sorrow.The Man in the time of the Prophet David who prayedto be fed without having to work for his food. 
After the petitioner had slain and eaten the cow, the owner of the cow came up and accused him of theft, and seizing him by the collar, dragged him before the judgment-seat of the prophet David. When he had stated his case, David ordered the accused to make restitution, telling him that he must not break the law. At this order the accused redoubled his cries, telling David that he was siding with an oppressor. David was staggered at the man’s assurance, and finally resolved to take further time for consideration before deciding the case. After private meditation he re-versed his former sentence, and directed the plaintiff to relinquish his claim. On the plaintiff refusing to do this, and stoutly protesting against David’s injustice. David further ordered that all the plaintiff’s goods should be given to the accused. The reason for this decision was, that David discovered the plaintiff had formerly slain the grandfather of the accused, and stolen all his goods. David then led all the Mosalmans to a tree in the desert where the murder had been perpetrated, and there put the murderer to death. 
The hands and feet of criminals betraytheir crimes even in this world.He of himself lifted the veil that hid his crime;Had he not done so, God would have kept it hidden.Criminals and sinners, even in the course of sinning,Themselves rend the coverings of their crimes.Their sins are veiled among the heart’s secrets,Yet the criminal himself exposes them to view,Saying, “Behold me wearing a pair of horns,A cow of hell in sight of all men.”Thus, even here, in the midst of thy sin, thy hand and footBear witness of the secrets of thy heart.Thy secret thought is as a governor who says to thee,“Tell forth thy convictions, withhold them not;”Especially in seasons of passion and angry talkIt betrays thy secrets one by one.Thy secret sins and crimes govern hand and foot,Saying, “Disclose us to men, O hand and foot!”And since these witnesses take the bit in their mouths,Especially in times of passion and wrath and revenge,Therefore the same God who appointed this governorTo blazen forth thy secret sins to the worldIs also able to create many more governorsTo divulge thy secret sins on the day of judgment. 4O man whose only handiwork is crime and sin;Thy secret sins are manifest; no divulging is needed.There is no need to proclaim thy sins,All men are cognizant of thy sin-burnt heart.Thy soul every moment casts up sparks of fire,Which say, “See me a man destined to the fire;I am a part of the fire, and go to join my whole;Not a light, so that I should join the Source of light.”Comparison of lust to the murderer in the story.Kill thine own lust and give life to the world;It has killed its lord, reduce it to servitude.That claimant of the cow is thy lust; Beware!It has made itself lord and master.That slayer of the cow is thy reason; Go!Be not obdurate to the prayers of him that kills the cow.Reason is a poor captive, and ever cries to GodFor meat on its dish without laboring and toiling.On what depends its getting meat without toiling?On its killing the cow of the body, the source of evil.Lust says, “Why hast thou killed my cow?”It says, “Because lust’s cow is the form of the body.” 5Reason, the Lord’s child, has become a pauper,Lust, the murderer, has become a lord and chief.Know’st thou what is meat untoiled for?’Tis the food of spirits and the aliment of the Prophet.But it is attainable only by slaying the cow;Treasure is gained by digging, O digger of treasure! 
NOTES: 
Koran lv. 5.2. Koran xii. 110.3. Koran ii. 136.4. “On that day shall their hands speak unto us, and their feet shall bear witness of that which they have done” (Koran xxxvi. 65).5. Bahau-’d-Din Amili, in his Nan wa Halwa, chap. iv., compares lust to a cow, referring to Koran ii. 63. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY XIII. The People of Saba. 
After an anecdote of ‘Isa being obliged to ascend a mountain to get away from the fools comes the story of the men of Saba. “A sign there was to Saba in their dwelling-places two gardens, the one on the right hand and the other on the left; ‘Eat ye of your Lord’s supplies, and give thanks to Him; goodly is the country and gracious is the Lord.’ But they turned aside, so we sent upon them the flood of lram. Such was our retribution on them for their ingratitude.” 1 The men of Saba were all fools, and brought destruction on themselves by their ingratitude to God. One was far-sighted, and yet blind; another sharp of hearing, and yet deaf; and a third naked, and yet wearing a long robe. Avarice is blind to its own faults, but sees those of others; the sharp-eared deaf man hears death approaching others, but not himself, and the long-robed naked man is he who fears robbers, though he has nothing to lose. In fact, all these men of Saba were afflicted with follies and self-delusions of this kind, and gave no thanks to God for the blessings which they enjoyed. Accordingly thirteen prophets were sent to admonish them, but their admonitions were not listened to, the men of Saba questioning their divine mission and demanding a miracle as a sign. They also told the prophets a parable of a clever hare, who, wishing to frighten an elephant away from a fountain, went to the elephant, pretending to be an ambassador from the moon.2 The prophets were naturally indignant at the effrontery of the men of Saba in misapplying parables to discredit their divine mission, and reminded them that wicked men had flouted the prophet Noah in the same way when he was warning them of the flood. And they demonstrated at length how the men of Saba had misapplied the parable of the hare and the elephant, and again adjured them to believe. But the men of Saba continued refractory, and would not, accept the Prophets’ counsels. They plied the prophets with the arguments of the Compulsionists (Jabriyan), and refused to be convinced of the fallacy of their reasoning. So at last the prophets despaired of them, and left them to their doom. 
Not every one can properly use similitudes and parables in divine matters.The faculty of using similitudes is peculiar to a saintWho is signally marked by knowledge of hidden mysteries.What know you of the mystery hid in aught, that youIn your folly should use similitudes of curl and cheek?Moses took his staff to be a stick, though it was not;It was a serpent, and its mystery was revealed.If a saint such as he knew not the mystery of a stick,What know you of the mystery of the snare and grains?When the eye of a Moses erred as to a similitude,How can a presumptuous mouse understand one?Those similitudes of yours are changed into serpentsTo tear you into pieces with their jaws.Such a parable did cursed Iblis use,So that he became cursed of God till the day of doom.Such a parable did Korah use in his argument,So that he was swallowed up in the earth with his wealth.Such parables know to be as crows and owls,Whereby a hundred households are annihilated.When Noah was building the ark in the desert,A hundred parable-mongers attacked him with irony,Saying, “In the desert, where is no water or well,He builds a boat! What ignorant folly is this!”The arguments of the Jabriyan, i.e., the Fatalists or Compulsionists.The men of Saba said, “O preachers, enough!What you say is enough, if there are any wise here.God has placed a ‘lock upon our hearts,’ 3And no man can overcome the Creator.That great Painter has painted us thus;His painting cannot be altered by argument.Keep telling forever a stone to become a ruby,Keep telling forever the old to become young!Tell earth to assume the quality of water,Bid water to become honey or milk!God is the creator of heaven and them that dwell therein;Also of water and of earth, and them that dwell therein;To heaven He gave its revolutions and its purity,To the earth its dark look and appearance.Can the heaven will to become as dregs?Can earth will to assume the clearness of pure wine?That Person has assigned ‘to each its lot,Can mountain by endeavor become as grass?”The prophets answered, “Verily God has createdSome qualities in you which you cannot alter;But He has created other accidental qualities,Which, being objectionable, may be made good.Bid stone become gold that is impossible;Bid copper become gold that is possible.Bid sand bloom as a rose it cannot;Bid dust turn to mud that is within its capacity.God has sent some pains for which there is no cure,Such, for instance, as lameness, loss of nose, and blindness.God has sent other pains for which there are cures,To wit, crooked mouth and headache.God has ordained these remedies of His mercy;The use of these in pain and anguish is not in vain.Nay, the majority of pains may be cured;When you seek those cures earnestly you find them.”The men of Saba replied, “O men, these pains of oursAre not of the sort ‘that admit of cure.Long time ye utter these presages and warnings,But our bonds are made thereby heavier every moment.If our sickness admitted of a cure,It would certainly have been lessened by your spells.When the body is obstructed water reaches not the liver,Though one drinks the ocean, it passes elsewhere.Then of course the hands and feet become dropsical,And. yet that draught does not quench his thirst.”The prophets replied, “To despair is wrong,The mercy and grace of God are boundless.One must not despair of the grace of such a Benefactor,One must cling to the stirrup-straps of God.Ah! many are the conditions which at first are hard,But, are afterwards relieved and lose their harshless.Oftentimes hope succeeds to hopelessness,Many times does sunlight succeed to darkness.We admit that ye are weighted as with stones,And that ye have locks upon your ears and your hearts. 4No condition of ours is altogether as we wish,Our business is to be resigned and to obey.God has enjoined this servitude upon us;We say not this merely on our own authority.We enjoy life on condition of doing His will;If He bids us, we sow our seed upon the sand.The soul of the prophet cares for naught but God,It has naught to do with approving or disapproving His works.”The men of Saba replied, “If ye yourselves are happy,Ye make us miserable and annoy and disturb us.Our souls were void of all anxieties,And ye have plunged us into cares and anxieties.The comfort and harmony which we enjoyed heretoforeHave been rent in pieces by your evil presages.We used to be as parrots munching sugar,Ye have made us as fowls brooding on death.On every side stories inspiring anxiety,On every side sounds exciting fears:On every side in the world an evil presage,On every side evil portents threatening punishment:This is the burden of your parables and presages,This the purport of your awe-inspiring stories.”The prophets replied, “Our evil presagesAre corroborated by the state of your souls.Suppose you are sleeping in a place of danger,And serpents are drawing near to bite your heads,A kind friend will inform you of your danger,Saying, ‘Jump up, lest the serpent devour you.’You reply, ‘Why do you utter evil presages?’He answers, ‘What presage? Up, and see for yourself!By means of this evil presage I rouse you,And release you from danger and lead you to your home.’Like a prophet he warns you of hidden danger,For a prophet sees what worldlings cannot see.”Mercy inclines the good to devotion, but vengeance the bad.If you do a kindness to a generous man, ’tis fitting,For each kindness he will return seven hundredfold.When you treat a base man with scorn and contumely,He will become your slave in all sincerity.Infidels when enjoying prosperity do wrong,When they are in hell they cry, “O our Lord!”For base men are purified when they suffer evil,And when they enjoy prosperity they do evil.Wherefore the mosque of their devotion is hell,As the snare is the fetter of wild fowl.The prison is the hermitage of the wicked thief,For when he is there he is ever crying to God.Whereas the object of man’s being is to worship God,Hell is ordained as a place of worship for the proud; 5Man has the power to engage in any actions soever,But worship of God is the main object of his existence.Read the text, 6 “I have not created Jinns and men but to worship me.”The only object of the world is to worship God.Though the object of a book is to teach an art,If you make a pillow of it, it serves that purpose too.Yet its main object is not to serve as a pillow,But to impart knowledge and useful instruction.If you use a sword for a tent-peg,You prefer the worse use of it to the better.Though the object of all men’s being is wisdom,Yet each man has a different place of worship.The place of worship of the noble is nobility,The place of worship of the base is degradation.Smite the base to make them bow the head.Give to the noble to make them repay liberally.Inasmuch as the base are evil and arrogant,Hell and humbling are the “small gate” for them.Verily God has created two places of adoration,Hell for the base and increased bliss for the noble.Even so Moses made a small gate in Jerusalem, 7To make the Israelites bow the head in entering it.The discussion is continued and illustrated by anecdotes of the Sufi who preferred a table with no food upon it, because he ever sought “not-being,” of Jacob’s vision of Joseph, and of a devout slave who obtained leave of his master to say his prayers in a mosque, but tarried there so long that the doors were shut, and he could not get out, nor his master in. The prophets at last despaired of making any impression upon the unbelievers, but called to mind the text “When at last the Apostles lost all hope, and deemed that they were reckoned as liars, our aid reached them, and we delivered whom we would, but our vengeance was not averted from the wicked.” 8The despair of the prophets.The prophets said, “How long, in our benevolence,Shall we give to this and that one good advice?How long shall we hammer cold iron in vain?How long waste breath in blowing into a lattice?Men are moved by God’s decree and fixed ordinance, 9As sharp-set teeth are caused by heat of belly.’Tis Primal Soul that dominates the Second Soul,10Fish begins to stink at the head, not the tail.Yet be advised and keep your steed straight as an arrow,When God says ‘Proclaim’ we must obey. 11O men, ye know not to which party ye belong, 12Exert yourselves then, till ye see which ye are.When you place goods upon a ship,You do it in trust that the voyage will be prosperous;You know not which of the two events will befall you,Whether you will be drowned or come safe to land.If you say, ‘Till I know which will be my fateI will not set foot upon the ship;Shall I be drowned on the voyage or a survivor?Reveal to me in which class I shall be.I shall not undertake the voyage on the chanceOn the bare hope of reaching land, as the rest do.’In that case no trade at all will be undertaken by you,As the secret of these two events is always hidden.The lamp of the heart, that is a timid trader,Acquires neither loss nor gain by its ventures.13Nay, it acquires loss, for it is precluded from gain;’Tis the lamp that takes fire that acquires light.Since all things are dependent on probability,Religion is so first of all, for thereby you find release.In this world no knocking at the door is possibleSave hope, and God knows what is best.”Probability the guide of life in religion as well as in common matters. “Religion dependent an hope and fear.” 14The final cause of trading is hope or probability,When traders work themselves lean as spindles. 15When the merchant goes to his shop in the morning,He does so in hope and probability of gaining bread.If you have no hope of getting bread, why go?There is the fear of loss, since you are not strong.But does not this fear of utter loss in your tradeBecome weakened in the course of your exertions?You say, “Although the fear of loss is before me,Yet I feel greater fear in remaining idle.I have a better hope through exerting myself;My fear is increased by remaining idle.”Why then, O faint-hearted one, in the matter of religionAre you paralysed by the fear of loss?See you not how the traders in this market of oursMake large profits, both apostles and saints?What a mine of wealth awaits them on leaving it,Seeing they make such profits while still here!Fire is soft to them as cotton raiment,The ocean bears them gently like a porter;Iron in their hands is soft as wax,The winds are their obedient slaves. 
NOTES: 
Koran xxxiv. 14.2. Anvar i Suhaili, chap. iv. Story IV.3. Koran xxxvi. 6.4. Koran lxi. 5: “God led their hearts astray.”5. God said, “Come ye either in obedience, or in spite of your wishes” (Koran xli. 10).6. Koran li. 56.7. See Koran ii. 55, with Sale’s note.8. Koran xii. 11.9. “All things have we created after a fixed decree, every action great and small is written.” Koran liv. 49.10. The Logos or first Emanation produced the second or “Universal Soul.”11. “O Apostle! proclaim all that hath been sent down” (Koran v. 71).12. “Which party,” i.e., those doomed to be saved or those doomed to destruction.13. “Nothing shall be reckoned to a man save that for which he hath made effort” (Koran liii. 40).14. So Sa’di Bostan Book I. Cp. Butler’s Analogy, Conclusion.15. i.e., exert themselves much. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY XIV. Miracles performed by the Prophet Muhammad. 
It is related that the Prophet was once present at a banquet, and after he had eaten and drunk, his servant Anas threw the napkin which he had used into the fire, and the napkin was not burnt, ‘but only purified by the fire. On another occasion a caravan of Arabs was traveling in the desert, and was in sore distress through lack of water, whereupon the Prophet miraculously increased the water in a single water-skin, so that it sufficed to supply the needs of all the travelers. Moreover, the negro who carried the water-skin was rendered as white and fair as Joseph. Again, a heathen woman came to the Prophet carrying her infant, aged only two months, and the infant saluted the Prophet as the veritable apostle of God. Again, when the prophet was about to put on his sandals, an eagle swooped down upon one of them and carried it off, when a viper was seen to drop from the sandal. The Prophet was at first inclined to grumble at this stroke of ill-luck; but when he saw the viper his discontent was turned into thankfulness to God, who had thus miraculously saved him from being bitten by the viper. 
In difficulties there is provided a way of salvation 1.In this tale there is a warning for thee, O Soul,That thou mayest acquiesce in God’s ordinances,And be wary and not doubt God’s benevolence,When sudden misfortunes befall thee.Let others grow pale from fear of ill fortune,Do thou smile like the rose at loss and gain;For the rose, though its petals be torn asunder,Still smiles on, and it is never cast down.It says, “Why should I fall into grief in disgrace?I gather beauty even from the thorn of disgrace.”Whatsoever is lost to thee through God’s decreeKnow of a surety is so much gained from misfortune.What is Sufiism? ’Tis to find joy in the heartWhensoever distress and care assail it.Know troubles to be that eagle of the Prophet’sWhich carried off the sandal of that holy one,In order to save his foot from the bite of the viperO excellent device! to preserve him from harm.’Tis said, “Mourn not for your slaughtered cattleIf a wolf has harried your flocks;”For that calamity may avert a greater calamity,And that loss may ward off a more grievous loss. 
NOTES: 
Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, vol. iii. . 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY XV. The Man who asked Moses to teach him the language of animals. 
A certain man came to Moses and desired to be taught the language of animals, for, he said, men used their language only to get food and for purposes of deception, and possibly a knowledge of animals’ languages might stimulate his faith. Moses was very unwilling to comply with his request, as he knew such knowledge would prove destructive to him, but, on his persisting, took counsel of God, and finally taught him the language of fowls and dogs. Next morning the man went amongst the fowls, and heard a discussion between the cock and the dog. The dog was abusing the cock for picking up the morsels of bread which fell from their master’s table, because the cock could find plenty of grains of corn to eat, whereas the dog could only eat bread. The cock, to appease him, said that on the morrow the master’s horse would die, and then the dog would have enough and to spare. The master, hearing this, at once sold his horse, and the dog, being disappointed of his meal, again attacked the cock. The cock then told him the mule would die, whereupon the master sold the mule. Then the cock foretold the death of a slave, and the master again sold the slave. At this the dog, losing patience, upbraided the cock as the chief of deceivers, and the cock excused himself by showing that all three deaths had taken place just as he had predicted, but the master had sold the horse, mule, and slave, and had thrown the loss on others. He added that, to punish him for his fraudulent dealing, the master would himself die on the morrow, and there would be plenty for the dog to eat at the funeral feast. Hearing this, the master went to Moses in great distress, and prayed to be saved. Moses besought the Lord for him, and gained permission that he should die in the peace of God. 
Why freewill is good for man.God said, “Do thou grant his earnest request,Enlarge his faculty according to his freewill.Freewill is as the salt to piety,Otherwise heaven itself were matter of compulsion.In its revolutions reward and punishment were needless,For ’tis freewill that has merit at the great reckoning.If the whole world were framed to praise God,There would be no merit in praising God.Place a sword in his hand and remove his impotence,To see if he turns out a warrior or a robber.Because freewill is that wherewith ‘we honor Adam,’ 1Half the swarm become bees and half wasps.The faithful yield honeycombs like bees,The infidels yield store of poison like wasps.For the faithful feed on choice herbs,So that, like bees, their chyle yields life-giving food,Whilst infidels feed on filth and garbage,And generate poison according to their food.”Men inspired of God are the fountain of life;Men of delusions are a synonym for death.In the world the praise “Well done faithful servant!”Is given to freewill which is used with prudence.If all dissolute men were shut up in prison,They would all be temperate and devout and pious.When power of choice is absent actions are worthless;But beware lest death snatch away your capital!Your power of choice is a capital yielding profit,Remember well the day of final account! 
NOTES: 
Koran xvii. 72. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY XVI. The Woman who lost all her infants. 
A woman bore many children in succession, but none of them lived beyond the age of three or four months. In great distress she cried to God, and then beheld in a vision the beautiful gardens of Paradise, and many fair mansions therein, and upon one of these mansions she read her own name inscribed. And a voice from heaven informed her that God would accept the sorrows she had endured in lieu of her blood shed in holy war, as, owing to her sex, she was unable to go out to battle like the men. On looking again, the woman beheld in Paradise all the children she had lost, and she cried, “O Lord ! they were lost to me, but were safe with Thee!”This story is followed by anecdotos of Hamza going out to battle without his coat-of-mail, of the Prophet advising a man who complained of being cheated in his bargains to take time before completing them, and of the death of Bilal, Muhammad’s crier, and by illustrations of the illusive nature of the world, of the difference between things self-evident and mere matters of inference, and between knowing a thing through illustrations and on the authority of others and knowing it as it really is in its essence. 
The difference between knowing a thing merely by similitudes and on the authority of others, and knowing the very essence thereof.God’s mercy is known through the fruits thereof,But who save God knows His essence? 1No one knows the very essence of God’s attributesBut only in their effects and by similitudes.A child knows naught of the nature of sexual intercourse,Except what you tell him, that it is like sweetmeats.Yet how far does the pleasure of sexual intercourseReally resemble that derived from sweetmeats?Nevertheless the fiction produces a relationBetween you, with your perfect knowledge, and the child;So that the child knows the matter by a similitude,Though he knows not its essence or actual nature.Hence if he says, “I know it,” ’tis not far wrongAnd if he says, “I know it not,” ’tis not wrong.Should one say, “Do you know Noah,That prophet of God and luminary of the Spirit?”If you say, “Do I not know him, for that moonIs more famed than the sun and moon of heaven?Little children in their schools,And elders in their mosques,All read his name prominently in the Koran,And preachers tell his story from times of yore;”You say true, for you know him by report,Though the real nature of Noah is not revealed to you.On the other hand, if you say, “What know I of NoahAs his contemporaries knew him?I am a poor ant what can I know of the elephant?What knows a fly of the motions of the elephant?”This statement also is true, O brother,Seeing that you know not his real nature.But this impotence to perceive real essence,Though common to ordinary men, is not universal;Because essence and its deepest secretsAre open and manifest to the eyes of the perfect.Negation and affirmation of one proposition are lawful;When the aspects differ the relation is double.“Thou castest not when thou castest” 2 shows such relation,Here negation and affirmation are both correct.Thou castest it, since it is in thy hand,Thou castest not, since ’tis God who affords the strength.The might of the sons of Adam is limited,How can a handful of sand shatter an army?The sand was in man’s hands, the casting was God’s.Owing to the two relations negation and affirmation are both true.The infidels know the prophets,As well as they doubtless know their own children;Yea, the infidels know them as well as their own sons,By a hundred tokens and a hundred evidences,But from envy and malice conceal their knowledge,And incline themselves to say, “We know them not.”So when God says in one place “knows them,”In another He says, “None knows them beside me.”For in truth they are hid under God’s overshadowing, 3And none but God knows them by actual experience.Therefore take this declaration with its context,Remembering how you know and do not know Noah. 
NOTES: 
There is a Hadis, “Think on God’s mercies, and not on His essence.”2. Koran viii. 17. Said of the sand cast into the eyes of the men of Mecca at Beder.3. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 354, where the commentator says the allusion is to Moses at Mount Sinai. Koran vii. 139. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY XVII. The Vakil of the Prince of Bokhara. 
The Prince of Bokhara had a Vakil who, through fear of punishment for an offence he had committed, ran away and remained concealed in Kuhistan and the desert for the space of ten years. At the end of that time, being unable to endure absence from his lord and his home any longer, he determined to return to Bokhara and throw himself at his lord’s feet, and endure whatever punishment his lord might be pleased to inflict upon him. His friends did all they could to dissuade him, assuring him that the Prince’s wrath was still hot against him, and that if he appeared at Bokhara he would be put to death, or at least imprisoned for the rest of his life. He replied, “O advisers, be silent, for the force of the love which is drawing me to Bokhara is stronger than the force of prudent counsels. When love pulls one way all the wisdom of Abu Hanifa and Ash-Shafi’i is impotent to withstand it. If it shall please my lord to slay me, I will yield up my life without reluctance, for this life of estrangement from him which I am now leading is the same as death, and release from it will be eternal happiness. I will return to Bokhara and throw myself at my lord’s feet, and say to him, ‘Deal with me as thou wilt, for I can no longer bear absence from thee, and life or death at thy hands is all the same to me!’” Accordingly, he journeyed back to Bokhara, counting the very toils and discomforts of the road sweet and delightful, because they were steps in his homeward course. When he reached Bokhara his friends and relations all warned him not to show himself, as the Prince was still mindful of his offence and bent on punishing him; but he replied to them as to his other advisers, that he was utterly regardless of his life, and was resolved to commit himself to his lord’s good pleasure. He then went to the court and threw himself at his lord’s feet and swooned away. The Prince, seeing the strong affection borne to him by his repentant servant, conceived a similar affection towards him, and descended from his throne and graciously raised him from the ground, and pardoned his offence. Thus it is that eternal life is gained by utter abandonment of one’s own life. When God appears to His ardent lover the lover is absorbed in Him, and not so much as a hair of the lover remains. True lovers are as shadows, and when the sun shines in glory the shadows vanish away. He is a true lover of God to whom God says, “I am thine, and thou art mine!”In the course of this story, which is narrated at great length, are introduced anecdotes of a lover and his mistress, of the Virgin Mary being visited by the “Blessed Spirit” or Angel Gabriel, 1 of the fatal mosque, of Galen’s devotion to carnal learning, of Satan’s treachery to the men of Mecca at the battle of Bedr, 2 and of Solomon and the gnat. There also occur comments on various texts, and a curious comparison of the trials and wholesome afflictions of the righteous to the boiling of potherbs in a saucepan by the cook. 
The reply of the lover when asked by his mistress which city of all those he had seen was most pleasing in his sight. 
A damsel said to her lover, “O fond youth,You have visited many cities in your travels;Which of those cities seems most delightful to you?”He made answer, “The city wherein my love dwells.In whatever nook my queen alights,Though it be as the eye of a needle, ’tis a wide plain;Wherever her Yusuf-like face shines as a moon,Though it be the bottom of a well, ’tis Paradise.With thee, my love, hell itself were heaven,With thee a prison would be a rose-garden.With thee hell would be a mansion of delight,Without thee lilies and roses would be as flames of fire!”The answer of the Vakil to those who advised him not to court death by yielding himself up to his lord.He said, “I am a drawer of water; water attracts me,Even though I know water may be my death.No drawer of water flees from water,Even though it may cause him a hundred deaths.Though it may make my hand and belly dropsical,My love for water will never be lessened.I should say, when they asked me about my belly,‘Would that the ocean might flow into it!’Though the bottle of my belly were burst with water,And though I should die, my death would be acceptable.Wheresoever I see one seeking water, I envy him,And cry, ‘Would I were in his place!’My hand is a tabor and my belly a drum,Like the rose I beat the drum of love of water.Like the earth or like a fetus I devour blood,Since I became a lover this is my occupation.If that ‘Faithful Spirit’ should shed my blood,I would drink it up drop by drop like the earth.At night I boil on the fire like a cooking-pot,From morn till eve I drink blood like the sand.It repents me that I planned a stratagem,And that I fled from before his wrath.Tell him to sate his wrath on my poor life,He is the ‘Feast of Sacrifice,’ and I his loving cow. 3The cow, whether it eats or sleeps,Thinks of naught but sacrificing itself.Know me to be that cow of Moses which gave its life,Each part of me gives life to the righteous.That cow of Moses was made a sacrifice,And its least part became a source of life.That murdered man leapt up from his deadnessAt the words, ‘ Strike the corpse with part of her.’ 4O pious ones, slay the cow (of lust),If ye desire true life of soul and spirit!I died as inanimate matter and arose a plant,I died as a plant and rose again an animal. 5I died as an animal and arose a man.Why then should I fear to become less by dying?I shall die once again as a manTo rise an angel perfect from head to foot!Again when I suffer dissolution as an angel,I shall become what passes the conception of man!Let me then become non-existent, for non-existenceSings to me in organ tones, ‘To him shall we return.’ 6Know death to be the gathering together of the people.The water of life is hidden in the land of darkness.Like a water-lily seek life there!Yea, like that drawer of water, at the risk of life,Water will be his death, yet he still seeks water,And still drinks on, and God knows what is right.O lover, cold-hearted and void of loyalty,Who from fear for your life shun the beloved!O base one, behold a hundred thousand soulsDancing towards the deadly sword of his love:Behold water in a pitcher; pour it out;Will that water run away from the stream?When that water joins the water of the streamIt is lost therein, and becomes itself the stream.Its individuality is lost, but its essence remains,And hereby it becomes not less nor inferior.I will hang myself upon my lord’s palm-treeIn excuse for having fled away from him!”Even as a ball rolling along on head and face,He fell at the feet of the Prince with streaming eyes.The people were all on the alert, expectingThat the Prince would burn him or hang him,Saying, “Moth-like he has seen the blaze of the light,And fool-like has plunged therein and lost his life.”But the torch of love is not like that torch,’Tis light, light in the midst of light,’Tis the reverse of torches of fire,It appears to be fire, but is all sweetness.Love generates love. “If ye love God, God will love you” 7That. Bokharian then cast himself into the flame,But his love made the pain endurable;And as his burning sighs ascended to heaven,The love of the Prince was kindled towards him.The heart of man is like the root of a tree,Therefrom grow the leaves on firm branches. 8Corresponding to that root grow up branchesAs well on the tree as on souls and intellects.The tops of the perfect trees reach the heavens,The roots firm, and the branches in the sky.Since then the tree of love has grown up to heaven,How shall it not also grow in the heart of the Prince?A wave washes away the remembrance of the sin from his heart,For from each heart is a window to other hearts.Since in each heart there is a window to other hearts,They are not, separated and shut off like two bodies.Thus, even though two lamp-dishes be not joined,Yet their light is united in a single ray.No lover ever seeks union with his beloved,But his beloved is also seeking union with him.But the lover’s love makes his body lean,While the beloved’s love makes hers fair and lusty.When in this heart the lightning spark of love arises,Be sure this love is reciprocated in that heart.When the love of God arises in thy heart,Without doubt God also feels love for thee.The noise of clapping of hands is never heardFrom one of thy hands unaided by the other handThe man athirst cries, “Where is delicious water?”Water too cries, “Where is the water-drinker?”This thirst in my soul is the attraction of the water;I am the water’s and the water is mine.God’s wisdom in His eternal foreknowledge and decreeMade us to be lovers one of the other.Nay more, all the parts of the world by this decreeAre arranged in pairs, and each loves its mate.Every part of the world desires its mate,Just as amber attracts blades of straw.Heaven says to earth, “All hail to thee!We are related to one another as iron and magnet.”Heaven is man and earth woman in character;Whatever heaven sends it, earth cherishes.When earth lacks heat, heaven sends heat;When it lacks moisture and dew, heaven sends them.The earthy sign 9 succours the terrestrial earth,The watery sign (Aquarius) sends moisture to it;The windy sign sends the clouds to it,To draw off unwholesome exhalations.The fiery sign (Leo) sends forth the heat of the sun,Like a dish heated red-hot in front and behind.The heaven is busily toiling through ages,Just as men labor to provide food for women.And the earth does the woman’s work, and toilsIn bearing offspring and suckling them.Know then earth and heaven are endued with sense,Since they act like persons endued with sense.If these two lovers did not suck nutriment from each other,Why should they creep together like man and wife?Without the earth how could roses and saffron grow?For naught can grow from the sole heat and rain of heaven.This is the cause of the female seeking the male,That the work of each may be accomplished.God has instilled mutual love into man and woman,That the world may be perpetuated by their union.Earth says to the earth of the body, “Come away,Quit the soul and come to me as dust.Thou art of my genus, and wilt be better with me,‘Thou had’st better quit the soul and fly to me!”Body replies “True, but my feet are fast bound,Though like thee I suffer from separation.”Water calls out to the moisture of the body,“O moisture, return to me from your foreign abode!”Fire also calls out to the heat of the body,“Thou art of fire; return to thy root!”In the body there are seventy-and-two diseases;It is ill compacted owing to the struggle of its elements.Disease comes to rend the body asunder,And to drag apart its constituent elements.The four elements are as birds tied together by the feet;Death, sickness and disease loose their feet asunder.The moment their feet are loosed from the others,‘The bird of each element flies off by itself.The repulsion of each of these principles and causesInflicts every moment a fresh pang on our bodies.That it may dissolve these composite bodies of ours,The bird of each part tries to fly away to its origin;But the wisdom of God prevents this speedy end,And preserves their union till the appointed day.He says, “O parts, the appointed time is not yet;It is useless for you to take wing before that day.”But as each part desires reunion with its original,How is it with the soul who is a stranger in exile?It says, “O parts of my habitation here below,My absence is sadder than yours, as I am heaven-born.The body loves green pastures and running water,For this cause that its origin is from them.The love of the soul is for life and the living one,Because its origin is the Soul not bound to place.The love of the soul is for wisdom and knowledge,That of the body for houses, gardens, and vineyards;The love of the soul is for things exalted on high,That of the body for acquisition of goods and food.The love too of Him on high is directed to the soul:Know this for ‘He loves them that love Him.’” 10The sum is this, that whoso seeks another,The soul of that other who is sought inclines to him.Let us quit the subject. Love for that soul athirstWas kindled in the breast of the Prince of Bokhara.The smoke of that love and the grief of that burning heartAscended to his master and excited his compassion.The praises addressed to the Prince by the Vakil. 
He said, “O phoenix of God and goal of the spiritI thank thee that thou hast come back from Mount Qaf!O Israfil of the resurrection-day of love,O love, love, and heart’s desire of love!Let thy first boon to me be this,To lend thine ear to my orisons.Though thou knowest my condition clearly,O protector of slaves, listen to my speech.A thousand times, O prince incomparable,Has my reason taken flight in desire to see thee,And to hear thee and to listen to thy words,And to behold thy life-giving smiles.Thy inclining thine ear to my supplicationsIs as a caress to my misguided soul.The baseness of my heart’s coin is known to thee,But thou hast accepted it as genuine coin.Thou art proud towards the arrogant and proud;All clemencies are as naught to thy clemency.First hear this, that while I remained in absence,First and last alike escaped me.Secondly, hear this. O prince beloved,That I searched much, but found no second to thee.Thirdly, that when I had departed outside thee,I said it was like the Christian Trinity. 11Fourthly, when my harvest was burned up,I knew not the fourth from the fifth.Wheresoever thou findest blood on the roads,Trace it, and ’tis tears of blood from my eyes.My words are thunder, and these sighs and tearsAre drawn by it as rain from the clouds.I am distracted between speaking and weeping.Shall I weep, or shall I speak, or what shall I do?If I speak, my weeping ceases;If I weep, I cease to praise and magnify thee.”He spoke thus, and then fell to weeping,So that high and low wept with him.So many “Ahs” and “Alases” proceeded from his heart,That the people of Bokhara formed a circle round him.Talking sadly, weeping sadly, smiling sadly,Men and women, small and great, were all assembled.The whole city wept in concert with him;Men and women mingled together as on the last day.Then Heaven said to Earth,“If you never saw a resurrection-day, see it here!”Reason was amazed, saying, “What love, what ecstasy!Is his separation more wondrous, or his reunion?” 
NOTES: 
Koran xix. 18.2. Koran viii. 10.3. The Id ul Azha, or the Feast of Sacrifices, held on the tenth day of the month Zul Hijja. It is also called “The Cow Festival.”4. This refers to Koran ii. 63. The cow was to be sacrificed in order that a murderer might be discovered by striking the corpse with a piece of her flesh.5. i.e., Earth losing its own form becomes vegetable, vegetable again perishes to feed and be transmuted into animal, , and in like manner animal becomes man. See the passage of Milton quoted below, and Gulshan i Raz, I. 490 and note.6. Koran ii. 153: “Verily we are God’s, and to Him shall we return.”7. Koran iii. 29.8. “Seest thou not to what God likeneth a good word? To a good tree, its root firmly fixed, and its branches in the heaven” (Koran xiv. 29).9. i.e., of the zodiac.10. Koran v. 59.11. “They surely are infidels who say, ‘God is the third of three,’ for there is no God but one God” (Koran v. 77). 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY XVIII. The Deadly Mosque. 
In the suburbs of a certain city there was a mosque in which none could sleep a night and live. Some said it was haunted by malevolent fairies; others, that it was under the baneful influence of a magic spell; some proposed to put up a notice warning people not to sleep there, and others advised that the door should be kept locked. At last a stranger came to that city and desired to sleep in the mosque, saying that he did not fear to risk his life, as the life of the body was naught, and God has said, “Wish for death if you are sincere.” 1 The men of the city warned him again and again of the danger, and rebuked him for his foolhardiness, reminding him that not improbably Satan was tempting him to his own destruction, as he tempted the men of Mecca at the battle of Bedr. 2 The stranger, however, would not be dissuaded, but persisted in his purpose of sleeping in the mosque. He said that he was as one of the devoted agents of the Ismailians, who were always ready to sacrifice their lives at the bidding of their chiefs, and that the terrors of death did not appal him any more than the noise of a little drum beaten by a boy to scare away birds could appal the great drum-bearing camel that used to march at the head of King Mahmud’s army. Accordingly, he slept in the mosque, and at midnight he was awakened by a terrible voice, as of one about to attack him. But instead of being dismayed, he bethought himself of the text “Assault them with thy horsemen and thy footmen,” 3 and confronted his unseen foe, challenging him to show himself and stand to his arms. At these words the spell was dissipated, and showers of gold fell on all sides, which the brave hero proceeded to appropriate. 
The “knowledge of certainty” and the “eye of certainty”.Our body and substance are snow, doomed to perish,God is He who buys them, for “God hath bought them.” 4You prefer this perishing snow to God’s priceBecause you are in doubt and have not certainty;And, strange to say, opinion abides in you, O weak one,And never flies away to the garden of certainty.Every opinion is aiming at certainty, O son,And more and more moves its wings towards certainty.When it reaches knowledge it stands erect,And its knowledge again hastes on towards certainty,Because in the approved road of the faithKnowledge is lower than certainty, but above opinion.Know knowledge aspires to certainty,And certainty again to sight and ocular evidence.In the chapter, “Desire of riches occupieth you,” 5After “Nay,” read “Would that ye knew!”Knowledge conducts you to sight, O knower!“If ye are certain, ye shall see hell-fire.”Sight follows on certainty with no interval,Just as reasoned knowledge is born of opinion.See the account of this in the chapter cited,How knowledge of certainty becomes the eye of certainty.As for me, I am above both opinion and certainty;My head is not affected by your cavils.Since my mouth has eaten of His sweetmeats,I am become clear-sighted, and see him face to face!The righteous are exposed to trials for their improvement, as potherbs are boiled to make them fit for food. 
Behold these potherbs boiling in the pot,How they jump and toss about in the heat of the fire.Whilst they are boiling, they keep leaping up,Even to the top of the pot, and utter cries,Saying to the housewife, “Why do you set us on the fire?Now you have bought us, why should you afflict us?”The housewife pushes them down with her spoon, saying,“Be still, and boil well, and leap not off the fire.I do not boil you because I dislike you,But that you may acquire a good savor and taste.When you become food you will be mingled with life;This trial is not imposed on you to distress you.In the garden you drank water soft and fresh;That water-fed one was reserved for this fire.Mercy was first shown to it before vengeance,That mercy might train it to be proof against trial;Mercy was shown to it previously to vengeance,That it might acquire its substance of being.Because flesh and skin grow not without tender care,How should they not grow when warmed by the Friend’s love.If vengeance follows as a necessary consequence,That you may make an offering of that substance,Mercy follows again to compensate for it,That you may be purified and raised above your nature.I am Abraham, and you his son under the knife.Lay down your head! ‘I have seen I must sacrifice you.’ 6Yield your head to vengeance, your heart to constancy,That I may cut your throat like an Ismailian’s.I cut off your head, but that head is suchThat it is restored to life by being cut off!”My main object herein is to inculcate resignation,O Mosalman! it behoves you to seek resignation. 7O potherbs, you boil in trials and sufferingsThat neither existence nor self may remain in you.Though you once smiled in that earthly garden,You are really roses of the garden of life and sight.If you are torn away from the garden of earth,You become sweet food to revive man’s life;Yea, become his food and strength and thought! 8You were only milk, you become a lion of the forest!You issue from God’s attributes at first;Return again back to those attributes with all speed!You come from the clouds and sunshine and sky,Then assume moral qualities and ascend the sky.You come in the form of rain and sunshine,You depart endued with excellent attributes.You begin as a part of the sun, clouds, and stars,You rise to be breath, act, word, and thought!The life of animals comes from the death of plants.True is the saying, ‘Kill me, O faithful ones!’Since such exaltation awaits us after death.True it is that ‘In our death is life.’Acts, words, and faith are the food of the King,So that in this ascent one attains to heaven.Thus, as potherbs become the food of men,They rise above the grade of minerals to that of animals.Objections of fools to the Masnavi.A certain goose pops his head out of his coop,And displays himself as a critic of the Masnavi,Saying, “This poem, the Masnavi, is childish;’Tis but a story of the prophets, and so on.’Tis not an account of the arguments and deep mysteries,Whereto holy men direct their attention;Concerning asceticism, and so on to self-annihilation,Step by step, up to communion with God;An explanation and definition of each several state,Whereto the men of heart ascend in their flight.”Whereas the Book of God resembles the Masnavi in this,The infidels abused it, in the same manner,Saying, ‘It contains old tales and stories; 9There is no deep analysis or lofty investigation therein.Little boys can understand it;It only contains commands and prohibitions,Accounts of Yusuf and his curled locks,Accounts of Jacob, of Zulaikha and her love,Accounts of Adam, of the wheat, and of the serpent Iblis,Accounts of Hud, of Noah, of Abraham, and the, fire.”Know the words of the Koran are simple,But within the outward sense is an inner secret one. 10Beneath that secret meaning is a third,Whereat the highest wit is dumbfoundered.The fourth meaning has been seen by noneSave God, the Incomparable and All-sufficient.Thus they go on, even to seven meanings, one by one,According to the saying of the Prophet, without doubt.Do thou, O son, confine not thy view to the outward meaning,Even as the demons saw in Adam only clay. 11The outward meaning of the Koran is like Adam’s body,For its semblance is visible, but its soul is hidden.O reviling dog! thou makest a clamour,Thou makest thy abuse of the Koran thy destruction. 12This is not a lion, wherefrom thou canst save thy life,Or canst secure thyself from his talons!The Koran cries out even to the last day,“O people, given up as a prey to ignorance,If ye have imagined me to be only empty fables,Ye have sown the seed of reviling and infidelity.Ye yourselves who abuse me will see yourselvesAnnihilated, and made like a tale that is told!”Solomon and the gnat.A gnat came in from the garden and fields,And called on Solomon for justice,Saying, “O Solomon, you extend your equityOver demons and the sons of Adam and fairies.Fish and fowl dwell under the shelter of your justice;Where is the oppressed one whom your mercy has not sought?Grant me redress, for I am much afflicted,Being cut off from my garden and meadow haunts.”Then Solomon replied, “O seeker of redress,Tell me from whom do you desire redress?Who is the oppressor, who, puffed up with arroganceHas oppressed you and smitten your face?”The gnat replied, “He from whom I seek redress is the Wind,’Tis he who has emitted the smoke of oppression at me;Through his oppression I am in a grievous strait,Through him I drink blood with parched lip!”Solomon replied to him, “O sweet voiced one,You must hear the command of God with all your heart.God has commanded me saying, ‘O dispenser of justice,Never hear one party without the other!’Till both parties come into the presence,The truth is never made plain to the judge.”When the Wind heard the summons, it came swiftly,And the gnat instantly took flight.In like manner the seekers of God’s presence-seat,When God appears, those seekers vanish.Though that union is life eternal,Yet at first that life is annihilation. 
NOTES: 
Koran ii. 88.2. Koran viii. 503. Koran xvii. 66.4. “Verily of the faithful hath God bought their persons and their substance, on condition of Paradise for them in return” (Koran ix. 112).5. “The desire of riches occupieth you till ye come to the grave. Nay! but in the end ye shall know. Nay! would that ye knew it with knowledge of certainty. Surely ye shall see hell-fire. Ye shall surely see it with the eye of certainty” (Koran cii.)6. Koran xxxvii. 101.7. According to its etymology. Islam means self-surrender to God as well as safety, peace, and obedience to divine laws.8. Cp. Milton, Paradise Lost, v. 482:“Flow’rs and their fruit,Man’s nourishment, by gradual scale sublim’d,To vital spirits aspire, to animal,To intellectual.”9. Koran xxvii. 7.10. There is a Hadis to the effect that each word of the Koran has seven meanings. See Koran iii. 5.11. Koran xvii. 63.12. The Lucknow commentator says that Faizi (brother of Abul Fazl Akbar’s minister) once spoke disrespectfully of the Koran and the Masnavi, and on the leaves being turned over, this passage presented itself.The book ends with the beginning of a story which is finished in the fourth book. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





BOOK IV. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY I. The Lover and his Mistress. 
THE fourth book begins with an address to Husamu-’d-Din, and this is followed by the story of the lover and his mistress, already commenced in the third book. A certain lover had been separated from his mistress for the space of seven years, during which he never relaxed his efforts to find her. At last his constancy and perseverance were rewarded, in accordance with the promises “The seeker shall find,” and “Whoso shall have wrought an atom’s weight of good shall behold it.” 1 One night, as he was wandering through the city, he was pursued by the patrol, and, in order to escape them, took refuge in a garden, where he found his long-sought mistress. This occasioned him to reflect how often men “hate the things that are good for them,” 2 and led him to bless the rough patrol who had procured him the bliss of meeting with his mistress.: Apropos of this, an anecdote is told of a preacher who was in the habit of blessing robbers and oppressors, because their evil example had turned him to righteousness. The moment the lover found himself alone with his mistress, he attempted to embrace her, but his mistress repulsed him, saying, that though no men ‘were present, yet the wind was blowing and that showed that God, the mover of the wind, was also present. The lover replied, “It may be I am lacking in good manners, but I am not lacking in constancy and fidelity towards you.” His mistress replied, “One must judge of the hidden by the manifest; I see for myself that your outward behavior is bad, and thence I cannot but infer that your boast of hidden virtues is not warranted by actual facts. You are ashamed to misconduct yourself in the sight of men, but have no scruple to do so in the presence of the All-seeing God, and hence I doubt the existence of the virtuous sentiments which you claim to possess, but which can only be known to yourself.” To illustrate this, she told the story of a Sufi and his faithless wife. This wife was one day entertaining a paramour, when she was surprised by the sudden return of her husband. On the spur of the moment she threw a woman’s dress over her paramour and presented him to her husband as a rich lady who had come to propose a marriage between her son and the Sufi’s daughter, saying she did not care for wealth, but only regarded modesty and rectitude of conduct. To this the Sufi replied, that as from her coming unattended it was plain that the lady had not the wealth she pretended to have, it was more than probable that her pretensions to extraordinary modesty and humility were also fictitious. The lover then proceeded to excuse himself by the plea that he had wished to test his mistress, and ascertain for himself whether she was a modest woman or not. He said he of course knew beforehand that she would prove to be a modest woman, but still he wished to have ocular demonstration of the fact. His mistress reproved him for trying to deceive her with false pretences, assuring him that, after he had been detected in a fault, his only proper course was to confess it, as Adam had done. Moreover, she added that an attempt to put her to the test would have been an extremely unworthy proceeding, only to be paralleled by Abu Jahl’s attempt to prove the truth of the Prophet’s claims by calling on him to perform a miracle. 
The soul of good in things evil. Evil only relative.The lover invoked blessings on that rough patrol,Because their harshness had wrought bliss for him.They were poison to most men, but sweets to him,Because those harsh ones had united him with his love.In the world there is nothing absolutely bad;Know, moreover, evil is only relative.In the world there is neither poison nor antidote,Which is not a foot to one and a fetter to another;To one the power of moving, to another a clog;To one a poison, to another an antidote.Serpents’ poison is life to serpents,In relation to mankind it is death.To the creatures of the sea the sea is a garden,To the creatures of the land it is fatal.In the same way, O man, reckon up with intelligenceThe relations of these things in endless variety.In relation to this man Zaid is as Satan,In relation to another he is as a Sultan.The latter calls Zaid a sincere Mussulman,The former calls him a Gueber deserving to be killed.Zaid, one and the same person, is life to the one,And to the other an annoyance and a pest.If you desire that God may be pleasing to you,Then look at Him with the eyes of them that love Him.Look not at that Beauty with your own eyes,Look at that Object of desire with His votaries’ eyes;Shut your own eyes from beholding that sweet Object,And borrow from His admirers their eyes;Nay, borrow from Him both eyes and sight,And with those eyes of His look upon His face,In order that you may not be disappointed with the sight.God says, “Whoso is God’s, God also is his.”God says, “I am his eye, his hand, his heart,” 3That his good fortune may emerge from adversity.Whatsoever is hateful to you, if it should lead youTo your beloved, at once becomes agreeable to you.Why God is named “Hearing,” “Seeing” and “Knowing”.God calls himself “Seeing,” to the end thatHis eye may every moment scare you from sinning.God calls himself “Hearing,” to the end thatYou may close your lips against foul discourse.God calls himself “Knowing,” to the end thatYou may be afraid to plot evil.These names are not mere accidental names of God,As a negro may be called Kafu’r (white);They are names derived from God’s essential attributes,Not mere vain titles of the First Cause.For if so, they would be only empty pleasantries,Like calling the deaf a hearer and the blind a seer,Or a name like “impudent” for a modest man,Or “beautiful” for an ugly negro,Or such a title as “Haji” for a new-born boy,Or that of “Ghazi” applied to a noble idler.If such titles as these are used in praising personsWho do not possess the qualities implied, ’tis wrong;’Twould be jesting or mockery or madness.“God is exalted above” what is said by evil men. 4I knew you before I met you face to face;That you had a fair face but an evil heart;Yea, I knew you before I saw you,That you were rooted in iniquity through guile.When my eye is red owing to inflammation,I know ’tis so from the pain, though I see it not.You regarded me as a lamb without a shepherd;You fancied that I had no guardian.Lovers have suffered chastisement for this cause,That they have cast ill-timed looks at fair ones.They have supposed the fawn to have no shepherd,They have supposed the captive to be going a begging;Till in the twinkling of an eye an arrow pierces them,Saying, “I am her guardian; look not at her rashly!”What! am I less than a lamb or a fallow deer,That I should have none to shepherd me?Nay, I have a Guardian worthy of dominion,Who knows every wind that blows upon me.He is aware whether that wind is chill or mild,He is not ignorant nor absent, O mean one.The carnal soul is made by God blind and deaf;I saw with the heart’s eye your blindness afar off.For this cause I never inquired about you for eight yearsBecause I saw you filled with ignorance and duplicity.Why indeed should I inquire about one in the furnace,Who is bowed down with reproach, like yourself?Comparison of the world to a bath stove,and of piety to the hot bath.The lust of the world is like a bath stove,Whereby the bath of piety is heated;But the lot of the pious is purity from the stove’s filth,Because they dwell in the bath and in cleanliness.The rich are as those that carry dungTo heat the furnace of the bath withal.God has instilled into them cupidity,That the bath may be warmed and pleasant.Quit this stove and push on into the bath;Know quitting the stove to be the bath itself.Whoso is in the stove-room is as a servantTo him who is temperate and prudent.Your lust is as fire in the world,With a hundred greedy mouths wide open.In the judgment of reason this gold is foul dung,Although, like dung, it serves to kindle the fire.Whoso was born in the stove-room and never saw purity,The smell of sweet musk is disagreeable to him. 
In illustration of this, a story follows of a tanner who was accustomed to bad smells in the course of his trade, and who was half killed by the smell of musk in the bazaar of the perfumers, but was cured by the accustomed smell of dung. 
NOTES: 
Koran xcix. 7.2. Koran ii. 213.3. “My servant draws nigh to me by pious deeds till I love him, and, when I love him, I am his eye, his ear, his tongue, his foot, his hand, and by me he sees, hears, talks, walks, and feels.” Hadis.4. Cp. Koran xvi 3. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY II. The Building of the “Most Remote Temple” at Jerusalem. 
King David purposed to build a temple at Jerusalem, but was forbidden to do so by a divine voice, because he had been a man of blood. But, it was added, the work should be accomplished by his son Solomon, and Solomon’s work would be reckoned the same as David’s, in accordance with the texts, “The faithful are brethren,” and “Sages are as a single soul,” and “We make no distinction between any of the apostles.” 1 Accordingly, when Solomon came to the throne, he set about the building, which was attended with many miraculous circumstances, e.g., the stones in the quarry crying out and moving of themselves to the site of the temple. Bilqis, Queen of Saba, sent Solomon a present of forty camels laden with ingots of gold; but Solomon would not receive them, and sent her messengers back with a letter commanding her to abandon the worship of the sun and embrace Islam. 2 At the same time he charged the messengers to report fully to the Queen all they had seen in his kingdom, and to urge her to comply with his commands to renounce her sovereignty and present herself in all humility at his court. As she delayed to come, Solomon again sent to assure her that he had no sinister views regarding her, and desired her attendance at his court solely for her own spiritual benefit. At last Bilqis renounced her royal state and cast away all care for worldly things, and, impelled by earnest desire to learn the true faith, presented herself at the court of King Solomon. Then Solomon commanded that the throne of Bilqis should be brought from Saba, and an ‘Afrit offered to fetch it, but Asaf, the vizier anticipated him. 3 Afterwards Solomon proceeded with the building of the temple, wherein he was assisted by devils and fairies. Then God tried Solomon by placing on his throne a false counterpart of him. His miracle working signet was stolen by a devil named Sakhar who thereupon assumed his shape and personated him for forty days, during which Solomon had to wander about and beg his bread. After this he regained his throne, and having completed the temple, began to worship therein. One day he observed that a tuft of coarse grass had sprung up in a corner of the temple, and he was greatly distressed because he thought it portended the ruin of the building, but he took comfort from the thought that while he himself lived the temple would not be allowed to fall into ruin; so long as he lived, at least, he would root up all evil weeds that threatened the safety of the temple, as well the temple built with hands as the spiritual temple in his heart.In the course of this story, which is told at great length, there occur anecdotes of the beginning of the reign of ‘Othman, of the miracles of ‘Abdullah Moghrabi, and others, of which abstracts are given below. 
Though philosophers call man the microcosm, divines call him the macrocosm.In outward form thou art the microcosm,But in reality the macrocosm. 4Seemingly the bough is the cause of the fruit, 5But really the bough exists because of the fruit.Were he not impelled by desire of fruit,The gardener would never have planted the tree.Therefore in reality the tree is born from the fruit,Though seemingly the fruit is born from the tree.For this cause Mustafa said, “Adam and all prophetsAre my followers and gather under my standard.Though to outward view I am a son of Adam,In reality I am his first forefather,Because the angels worshipped him for my sake,And ’twas in my footsteps that he ascended to heaven.Hence in reality our first parent was my offspring,As in reality the tree is born of its own fruit.”What is first in thought is last in act.Thought is the special attribute of the Eternal.This product goes forth from heaven very swiftly,And comes to us like a caravan. 6’Tis not a long road that this caravan travels;Can the desert stop the deliverer?The heart travels to the Ka’ba every moment,And by divine grace the body acquires the same power.Distance and nearness affect only the body,What do they matter in the place where God is?When God changes the body,It regards not parasangs or miles.Even on earth there is hope of approaching God.Press on like a lover, and cease vain words, O son! 
In the course of his rebuke to the messengers of Bilqis for bringing him mere gold instead of a humble heart, Solomon tells the story of the druggist who used soapstone or Persian earth for a weight. A man came to him to buy sugar-candy, and as he had no weight at hand, he used a lump of soapstone instead; but, while his back was turned, the purchaser stole a bit of the soapstone. The druggist, though he saw what he was doing, would not interrupt him, for he knew that the more soapstone the purchaser stole, the less sugar-candy he would get. In like manner the more men grasp at the transitory wealth of this world, the less they will obtain of the stable wealth of the world to come. 
Part of Soloman’s message to Bilqis.Report to Bilqis what marvels ye have seen,And what plains of gold belong to Solomon;How ye beheld forty mansions faced with gold,And how ye were ashamed of your presents;That she may know Solomon is not covetous of gold;He has received gold from the Creator of gold.The moment he wills it, every grain of earth’s dustIs changed into gold and precious pearls.For this cause, O thou that lovest gold,On the last day God will make earth all silver (white). 7Quit thy wealth, even if it be the realm of Saba;Thou wilt find many realms not of this earth.What thou callest a throne is only a prison;Thou thinkest thyself enthroned, but art outside the door.Thou hast no sovereignty over thine own passions,How canst thou sway good and evil?Thy hair turns white without thy concurrence,Take shame to thyself for thy evil passions.Whoso bows his head to the King of kingsWill receive a hundred kingdoms not of this world;But the delight of bowing down before GodWill seem sweeter to thee than countless glories.” 
An anecdote follows of a darvesh who saw in a dream some saints, and prayed them to provide him with his daily bread without obliging him to mix in worldly affairs. The saints ordered him to go to the forest, and there he found that all the wild fruits were rendered fit for his food. Having a few grains of gold by him, which he had gained by worldly labour before this miracle had been wrought for him, he was about to give them to a poor woodcutter who was passing that way. But this woodcutter was a saint, and at once read his thoughts, and to show, like Solomon, that he had no need of worldly wealth, he offered up a short prayer to God, and straightway his bundle of firewood was changed into gold, and immediately after, at another prayer, was changed back again into firewood.Ibrahim bin Adham aud his fondness for music. 8 
Haste to renounce thy kingdom, like Ibrahim bin Adham,To obtain, like him, the kingdom of eternity.At night that king would sleep on his throne,With his guards of state surrounding his palace,Though he needed no guards for the purposeOf warding off robbers and vagabonds;For he who is a just king knows everything,And is safe from harm and his mind is at peace.Justice is the guardian of his steps,Not guards with drums round his palace.His purpose in having this band of music was this,To recall to his longing heart that call of God. 9The wailing of horn and the thunder of drumResemble in some sort that dread “trumpet blast.” 10Wherefore philosophers say that we have learnedOur melodies from those of the revolving spheres.The song of the spheres in their revolutionsIs what men sing with lute and voice.The faithful hold that the sweet influences of heavenCan make even harsh voices melodious.As we are all members of Adam,We have heard these melodies in Paradise;Though earth and water have cast their veil upon us,We retain faint reminiscences of those heavenly songs.But while we are thus shrouded by gross earthly veils,How can the tones of the dancing spheres reach us? 11Hence it is that listening to music is lovers’ food,Because it recalls to them their primal union with God.The inward feelings of the mind acquire strength,Nay, are shown outwardly, under influence of music.The fire of love burns hotter under stimulus of music,Even as occurred in the case of the nut-gatherer.Ibrahim’s abdication.Once that noble Ibrahim, as he sat on his throne,Heard a clamour and noise of cries on the roof,Also heavy footsteps on the roof of his palace.He said to himself, “Whose heavy feet are those?”He shouted from his window, “Who goes there?’Tis no man’s step; surely ’tis a fairy.”His guards, filled with confusion, bowed their heads,Saying, “It is we who are going the rounds in search.”He said, “What seek ye?” They said “Our camels” 12He said, “Who ever searched for camels on a housetop?”They said, “We follow thy example,Who seekest union with God while sitting on a throne.”This was all, and no man ever saw him again,Just as fairies are invisible to men.His substance was hid from men, though he was with them,For what can men see save the outward aspect and dress?As he was removed from the sight of friends and strangers,His fame was noised abroad like that of the ‘Anka.For the soul of every bird that reaches Mount QafConfers glory on the whole family of birds. l3The anecdote of the nut-gatherer, introduced in the above story, is only another version of the story of the thirsty man who threw bricks into the water in order to hear the sound of the splash. 14 This is followed by an address to Husamu-’d-Din, in which the poet says that his object in writing the Masnavi was to elicit words from Husam, as his words were the same as the words of God.Solomon’s preaching to the people of Bilqis. The art of preaching.I tell the tale of Saba in lovers’ style.When the breeze bore Solomon’s words to that garden,’Twas as when bodies meet souls at the resurrection,Or as when boys return to their loved homes.The people of love are hidden amongst the peoples,As a liberal man encompassed by the contumely of the base.Souls are disgraced by union with bodies,Bodies are ennobled by union with souls.Arise, O lovers; this sweet draught is yours;Ye are they that endure; eternal life is yours.Ho! ye that seek, arise and take your fill of love,Snuff up that perfume of Yusuf!Approach, O Solomon, thou that knowest birds’ language,Sound the note of every bird that draws near; 15When God sent, thee to the birds,He taught thee first the notes of all the birds.To the predestinarian bird talk predestination,To the bird with broken wings preach patience,To the patient well-doer preach comfort and pardon,To the spiritual ‘Anka relate the glories of Mount Qaf,To the pigeon preach avoidance of the hawk,To the lordly hawk mercy and self-control;As for the bat, who lingers helpless in the dark,Acquaint him with the society of the light;To the fighting partridge teach peace,To the cock the signs of dawning day.In this way deal with all from the hoopoo to the eagle.Then follows a long account of various miraculous incidents that occurred during the childhood of the Prophet, how he was suckled by Halima, a woman of the Bani Sa’ad, how the idols bowed down before him, how he strayed from home, how his grandfather, Abd ul Muttalib, prayed to God that he might be found, and how he was at last found in the Ka’ba and restored to his grandfather.Next a story is told of a cur who attacked a blind man (Kur) in the street, rather than hunt the wild ass (Gor) on the mountains in company with well-bred dogs. This is an illustration of the thesis that mankind is prone to run after mean earthly objects, and to neglect aspiring to the spiritual world.Solomon’s admonitions to Bilqis.Ah! Bilqis, bestir thyself now the market is thronged,Flee away from them whose traffic is unprofitable! 16Arise, Bilqis, now that thou hast the choice,Before that death lays his heavy hand upon thee.Soon will death pull thy ears, as if thou wertA thief dragged before the officer in deadly fear.How long wilt thou steal shoes from asses of the world?If thou must steal, steal pearls of the world above.Thy sisters have found the kingdom that lasts forever,Thou cleavest to the kingdom of darkness.Happy is he who quits this earthly kingdom,Which sooner or later death will destroy.Arise! O Bilqis, at least beholdThe kingdom of the royal kings of the faith!In reality they are seated in the garden of the spirit,Though to outward view they are guiding their friends.That spiritual garden accompanies them everywhere,Yet it is never revealed to the eyes of the people,Its fruits ever asking to be gathered,Its fount of life welling up to be drunk!Go round about the heavens without aid of wings,Like sun or full moon or new moon!Thou wilt move as a spirit without aid of feet,Thou wilt eat sweet viands without mouth or palate.No crocodile of sorrow will attack thy bark,Nor will sad thoughts of death assail thee.Thou wilt be at once queen, army, and throne,Endued with good fortune and fortune itself. 17Thou sayest thou art a great queen of good fortune;But thy fortune is apart from thee and will soon fade,Thou wilt be left like a, beggar without sustenance;Therefore, O chosen one, become thy own fortune.When, O spiritual one, thou hast become thy own fortune,Then, being thyself thy fortune, thou wilt never lose it.How. O fortunate one, canst thou ever lose thyself,When thy real self is thy treasure and thy kingdom?How men and demons helped Solomon in building the temple.When Solomon laid the foundations of the temple,Men and Jinns came and lent their aid to the work,Some of them with good-will, and others on compulsion,Even as worshippers follow the road of devotion.Men are as demons, and lust of wealth their chain,Which drags them forth to toil in shop and field.This chain is made of their fears and anxieties.Deem not that these men have no chain upon them.It causes them to engage in labor and the chase,It forces them to toil in mines and on the sea,It urges them towards good and towards evil.God saith, “On their necks is a rope of palm fibre,” 18And “Verily on their necks have we placed ropes, 19“We make this rope out of their own dispositions;There is none either impure or intelligent,But we have fastened his work about his neck.” 20Thy lust is even as fire burning in thy evil deeds;The black coal of these deeds is lighted by the fire;The blackness of the coal is first hidden by the fire,But, when it is burnt, the blackness is made visible.The building of the prophets was without lust,And accordingly its splendor ever increased.Yea, many are the noble temples they have raised,Though all were not named “The Most Remote Temple.”The Ka’ba, whose renown waxes greater every moment,Owed its foundation to the piety of Abraham.Its glory is not derived from stones and mortar,But from being built without lust or strife.Neither are the prophets’ writings like other writings;Nor their temples, nor their works, nor their families;Nor their manners, nor their wrath, nor their chastisements;Nor their dreams, nor their reason, nor their words.Each one of them is endued with a different glory,Each soul’s bird winged with different feathers.Ho! pious ones, build the lively temple of the heart,That the Divine Solomon may be seen, and peace be upon you!And if your demons and fairies be recalcitrant,Your good angels must place collars on their necks.If your demons go astray through guile and fraud,Chastisement must overtake them swift as lightning.Be like Solomon, so that your demonsMay dig stones for your spiritual edifice.Be like Solomon, free from evil thoughts and guile,So that carnal demons and Jinns may be submissive to you.Your heart is as Solomon’s signet; take good careThat it falls not a prey to demons,For then demons will rule over you as over Solomon.Guard then your signet from the demons, and be at peace.Then follows a story of a poet who recited a panegyric in honor of a liberal king. The king commanded that he should receive one thousand pieces of gold, but the vazir, named Abul-Hasan, gave him ten thousand. The poet went to his home well contented, but after some years fell into poverty, and naturally bethought him of the generous king and his vazir, who had before assisted him. Sibawayh, the grammarian of Shiraz says “Allah” is derived from “Alah” (fleeing for refuge) and thus we see all creatures, and even the elements themselves, ever looking to Allah to sustain them in existence. The poet, therefore, again presented himself to the king with a new panegyric, and the king, on hearing it, commanded as before that a thousand pieces of gold should be given him. But the new vazir, who was also named Abul-Hasan, persuaded the king that the exchequer could not afford this large outlay, and kept the poet waiting so long for his money, that at last he was glad to get away with only one hundred pieces of gold. These two vazirs recall Asaf, the good vazir of King Solomon, who deserves the title “Light upon light,” 21 and Haman, the evil vazir of Pharaoh, who turned his he,art against Moses, and brought many plagues upon the kingdom of Egypt.How all creatures cry to God for sustenance. 
Yea, all the fish in the seas,And all feathered fowl in the air above,All elephants, wolves, and lions of the forest,All dragons and snakes, and even little ants,Yea, even air, water, earth, and fire,Draw their sustenance from Him, both winter and summer.Every moment this heaven cries to Him, saying,“O Lord, quit not Thy hold of me for a moment!The pillar of my being is Thy aid and protection;The whole is folded up in that right hand of Thine.” 22And earth cries, “O keep me fixed and steadfast,Thou who hast placed me on the top of waters!”All of them are waiting and expecting His aid,All have learned of Him to represent their needs.Every prophet extols this prescription,“Seek ye help with patience and with prayer.” 23Ho! seek aid of Him, not of another than HimSeek water in the ocean, not in a dried-up channel. 
The next anecdote is that of the raven who taught Cain the art of digging graves and burying corpses, as told in Koran v. 34. This is designed to illustrate the thesis that unaided human reason can discover no now truth, unless inspired by Divine wisdom, of which the prophets, and especially “Universal Reason,” or the Prophet Muhammed, are the channels. Thus physicians and herbalists have derived their knowledge of the virtues of plants from the instructions originally given by King Solomon when he classified the plants that grew in the court of the temple. The inner eye sees more than is visible to the sight of the vulgar. To illustrate this, an anecdote is told of a Sufi who had accompanied his friends to a beautiful garden, but instead of looking about and enjoying the fragrance of the flowers and fruits, sat with his head sunk on his breast in Sufi fashion. His friends said to him, in the words of the Koran, “Look at the signs of God’s mercy, how after its death He quickeneth the earth!” 24 He answered them that these signs were far more plainly visible to him in his heart than in the outward creation, which was merely as it were a blurred reflection from the spiritual creation enshrined in his heart. For God says, “The life of the world is naught but a cheating fruition.” 25 In other words, “Nature conceals God, but the supernatural in man reveals Him.” 26 
On cleansing the inward temple of the heart from self-conceit and reliance on carnal reason.When the body bows in worship, the heart is a temple,And where there is a temple, there bad friends are weedsWhen a liking for bad friends grows up in you,Flee from them, and avoid converse with them.Root up those weeds, for, if they attain full growth,They will subvert you and your temple together.O beloved, this weed is deviation from the “right way,”You crawl crookedly, like infants unable to walk.Fear not to acknowledge your ignorance and guilt,That the Heavenly Master may not withhold instruction.When you say, “I am ignorant; O teach me,”Such open confession is better than false pride.O ingenuous one, learn of our father Adam,Who said of yore, “O Lord, we have dealt unjustly.” 27He made no vain excuses and prevaricated not,Nor did he raise the standard of guile and craft.On the other hand, Iblis raised arguments, saying,“I used to be honorable; Thou hast disgraced me.My stain is owing to Thee; Thou art my dyer;Thou hast caused my sin and transgression.”Read the text, “Lord, Thou hast caused me to err,” 28That you plead not compulsion, and so err (like Iblis).How long will you climb into that tree of compulsion?How long cast out of sight your own freewill?How long, like Iblis and his evil crew,Throw the blame of your own sins upon God?How were you compelled to sin when you took such pleasureAnd pride in engaging in those sins?Does a man feel such pleasure in acting on compulsionAs he exhibits when committing wrong actions?You battle like twenty men against thoseWho give you good advice not to do that act;Saying to them, “This is right and quite proper;Who dissuades me from it but men of no account?”Does a man acting on compulsion talk like this?Or rather one who is erring of his own freewill?Whatever your lust wills you deem freewill,What reason demands you deem compulsion.Whoso is wise and prudent knows this,That cleverness comes from Iblis, but love from Adam.Cleverness is like Canaan’s swimming in the ocean; 29’Tis no river or small stream; ’tis the mighty ocean.Away with this attempt to swim; quit self-conceit.‘Twill not save you; Canaan was drowned at last.Love is as the ark appointed for the righteous,Which annuls the danger and provides a way of escape.Sell your cleverness and buy bewilderment;Cleverness is mere opinion, bewilderment intuition.Make sacrifice of your reason at the feet of Mustafa,Say, “God Sufficeth me, for He, is sufficient for me.” 30Do not, like Canaan, hang back from entering the ark,Being puffed up with vain conceit of cleverness.He said, “I will escape to the top of high mountains,Why need I put myself under obligation to Noah?”Ah! better for him had he never learnt swimming!Then he would have based his hopes on Noah’s ark.Would he had been ignorant of craft as a babe!Then like a babe he would have clung to his mother.Would he had been less full of borrowed knowledge!Then he would have accepted inspired knowledge from his father.When, with inspiration at hand, you seek book-learning,Your heart, as if inspired, loads you with reproach. 31Traditional knowledge, when inspiration is available,Is like making ablutions with sand when water is near.Make yourself ignorant, be submissive, and thenYou will obtain release from your ignorance.For this cause, O son, the Prince of men declared,“The majority of those in Paradise are the foolish.” 32Cleverness is as a wind raising storms of pride;Be foolish, so that your heart may be at peace;Not with the folly that doubles itself by vain babble,But with that arising from bewilderment at “The Truth.”Those Egyptian women who cut their hands were fools 33Fools as to their hands, being amazed at Yusuf’s face.Make sacrifice of reason to love of “The Friend,”True reason is to be found where He is.Men of wisdom direct their reason heavenwards,Vain babblers halt on earth where no “Friend” is.If through bewilderment your reason quits your head,Every hair of your head becomes true reason and a head. 
Then follow commentaries on the text, “O thou enfolded in thy mantle;” 34 on the proverb, “Silence is the proper answer to a fool;” on the Hadis, “God created the angels with reason and the brutes with lust, but man he created with both reason and lust; the man who follows reason is higher than the angels, and the man who follows lust is lower than the brutes;” on the text, “As to those in whose heart is a disease, it will add doubt to their doubt, and they shall die infidels,” 35 and a comparison of the struggle between reason and lust to that between Majnun and his she-camel, he trying to get to his mistress Laila, and the she-camel trying to run home to her foal. 
NOTES: 
Koran xlix. 10; xxxi. 27; ii. 285.2. The letter is given in Koran xxvii. 30.3. All these legends are derived from Koran xxi., xxvii., and xxxviii. See Sale’s notes.4. This refers to Muhammad, who is at once the “First reason” (Logos) and the “Perfect man,” who is “the sum of all the worlds” and the “Great world.” See Notices et Extraits des MSS., x. .5. He was also the final cause of creation. “If it had not been for thee, the world had not been created.”6. Muhammad as the Logos is the channel by which divine grace is conveyed to man. The “change of the body” is an allusion to the ascension of Muhammad (Mi raj).7. A Hadis.8. Music is much used in the religious services of the “Maulavi” order of Darveshes, founded by Jalalu -d-Din Rumi. See “The Dervishes,” by J.P. Brown, .9. “Am not I your lord?” (Koran vii. 171).10. “When there shall be a trumpet blast, that shall be a dreadful day” (Koran lxxiv. 7).11. The so-called Pythagorean doctrine of the “Harmony of the spheres” was as well known to Persian poets as to Shakespeare.12. This is an allusion to the story of the “Believer’s lost camel.” Book ii., Story xi.13. This alludes to the well-known poem of Faridu-d-Din ‘Attar the “Mantiqu-t-Tair.”14. Book ii. Story v.15. Koran xxvii. 16. There is a Hadis, “Speak to men according to the amount of their intelligence.”16. “These are they who have bought error at the price of guidance, but their traffic hath not been gainful” (Koran ii. 15).17. Union attained, all duality and separate phenomenal existence are swallowed up in the One (Noumenon). (See Gulshan i Raz, I. 835 and 845).18. Koran iii. 5.19. Koran xxxvi. 7.20. “And every man’s work have we fastened about his neck, and on the last day will we bring forth to him a book, which shall be shown to him wide open. Read thy book; there needeth none but thyself to make out an account against thee that day “ (Koran xvii. 14).21. Koran xxiv. 35.22. Koran xxxix. 67.23. Koran ii. 148.24. Koran xxx. 49.25. Koran iii. 182.26. “But is it unreasonable to confess that we believe in God, not by reason of the nature which conceals him, but by reason of the supernatural in man, which alone reveals him and proves him to exist? “ (Jacobi, quoted in Sir W. Hamilton’s Lectures on Metaphysics, vol. i. ).27. Koran vii. 22.28. He said, “That thou hast caused me to err” (Koran vii. 15). This is the burden of many of ‘Omar Khayyam’s poems.29. Koran xi. 43. See Book iii., Story 5.30. Koran ix. 130.31. Knowledge of “The Truth” is to be attained not by exercise of the reason, but by illumination from above. When the light of “The Truth” is revealed, reason is drowned in bewilderment. Gulshan i Raz, Answer ii.32. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, vol. ii. ; 1 Cor. iv. 10.33. “They were amazed at Yusuf, and cut their hands, and said, ‘God keep us, this is no man!’” (Koran xii. 31).34. Koran lxxiii. 1.35. Koran ix. 126. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY III. The Youth who wrote a letter of complaint about his rations to the King. 
A certain youth in the service of a great king was dissatisfied with his rations, so he went to the cook and reproached him with dishonoring his master by his stinginess. The youth would not listen to his excuses, but wrote off an angry letter of complaint to the king, in terms of outward compliment and respect, but betraying an angry spirit. On receiving this letter, the king observed that it contained only complaints about meat and drink, and evinced no aspirations after spiritual food, and therefore needed no answer, as “the proper answer to a fool is silence.” 1 When the youth received no answer to his letter, he was much surprised, and threw the blame on the cook and on the messenger, ignoring the fact that the folly of his own letter was the real reason of its being left unanswered. He wrote in all five letters, but the king persisted in his refusal to reply, saying that fools are enemies to God and man, and that he who has any dealings with a fool fouls his own nest. Fools only regard material meat and drink, whereas the food of the wise is the light of God, as it is said by the Prophet, “I pass the night in the presence of my Lord, who giveth me meat and drink,” 2 and again, “Fasting is the food of God,” i.e., the means by which spiritual food is obtained. 3 
Explanation of the text “And Moses conceived a secret fear within him. We said ‘Fear not, for thou shalt be uppermost (over Pharaoh’s magicians) ‘“. 4Moses said, “Their sorcery confuses them;What can I do? These people have no discernment.”God said, “I will generate in them discernment;I will make their undiscerning reason to see clearly.Although like a sea their waves cast up foam,O Moses, thou shalt prevail over them; fear not!”The magicians gloried in their own achievements,But when Moses’ rod became a snake, they were confounded.Whoso boasts of his beauty and wit,The stone of death is a touchstone of his boasts.Sorcery fades away, but the miracles of Moses advance.Both resemble a dish falling from a roof:The noise of the dish of sorcery leaves only cursing;The noise of the dish of faith leaves edification.When the touchstone is hidden from the sight of all,Then come forth to battle and boast, O base coin!Your time for boasting is when the touchstone is away;The hand of power will soon crush your exaltation.The base coin says to me with pride every moment,“O pure gold, how am I inferior to you?”The gold replies, “Even so, O comrade;But the touchstone is at hand; be ready to meet it!”Death of the body is a benefaction to the spiritual;What damage has pure gold to dread from the shears?If the base coin were of itself far-sighted,It would reveal at first the blackness it shows at last.If it had showed its blackness at first on its face,’Twould have avoided hypocrisy now and misery at last.’Twould have sought the alchemy of grace in due time;Its reason would have prevailed over its hypocrisy.If it became broken-hearted through its own bad state,’Twould look onward to Him that heals the broken;’Twould look to the result and be broken-heartedAnd be made whole at once by the Healer of broken hearts.Divine grace places base copper in the alembic,Adulterated gold is excluded from that favor.O adulterated gold, boast not, but see clearlyThat thy Purchaser is not blind to thy defects.The light of the judgment-day will enlighten his eyesAnd destroy the glamour of thy fascinations.Behold them that have regard to the ultimate result,And also the regrets of foolish souls and their envy.Behold them that regard only the present,And cast away thoughts of evil to come from their minds. 
NOTES: 
See Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, i. 551, for a parallel.2. Koran xxvi. 79.3. See Mishkat ul Masabih, vol. i. .4. Koran xx. 70. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY IV. Bayazid and his impious sayings when beside himself. 
The holy saint Bayazid before his death predicted the birth of the saint Abul-Hasan Khirqani, and specified all the peculiar qualities which would be seen in him. And after his death it came to pass as he had predicted, and Abul-Hasan, hearing what Bayazid had said, used to frequent his tomb. One day he visited the tomb as usual, and found it covered with snow, and a voice was heard saying, “The world is fleeting as snow. I am calling thee! Follow me and forsake the world!”How Bayazid cried out, when beside himself, “Glory be to me!” and how his disciples were scandalized at this saying, and how Bayazid answered them. 
Once that famous saint Bayazid came to his disciples,Saying, “Lo, I myself am God Almighty.”That man of spiritual gifts being visibly beside himself;Said, “There is no God beside me; worship me!”Next morning, when his ecstatic state had passed,They said, “You said so and so, which was impious.”He answered, “If I do so again,Straightway slay me with your knives!God is independent of me; I am in the body.If I say that again you must kill me!”When that holy person had given this injunction,Each of his disciples made ready his knife.Again that overflowing cup became beside himself,And his recent injunctions passed from his mind.Alienation came upon him, reason went astray,The dawn shone forth and his lamp paled at its light.Reason is like an officer when the king appears;The officer then loses his power and hides himself.Reason is God’s shadow; God is the sun.What power has the shadow before the sun?When a man is possessed by an evil spiritThe qualities of humanity are lost in him.Whatever he says is really said by that spirit,Though it seems to proceed from the man’s mouth.When the spirit has this rule and dominance over him,The agent is the property of the spirit, and not himself;His self is departed, and he has become the spirit.The Turk without instruction speaks Arabic; 1When he returns to himself he knows not a word of it.Seeing God is lord of spirits and of man,How can He be inferior in power to a spirit?When the eagle of alienation from self took wing,Bayazid began to utter similar speeches;The torrent of madness bore away his reason,And he spoke more impiously than before.“Within my vesture is naught but God,Whether you seek Him on earth or in heaven.”His disciples all became mad with horror,And struck with their knives at his holy body.Each one, like the assassins of Kardkoh, 2Without fear aimed at the body of his chief.Each who aimed at the body of the Shaikh,His stroke was reversed and wounded the striker.No stroke took effect on that man of spiritual gifts,But the disciples were wounded and drowned in blood.Each who had aimed a blow at his neck,Saw his own throat cut, and gave up the ghost;He who had struck at his breastHad cleft his own breast and killed himself.They who knew better that lord of felicity,Who had not courage enough to strike a deadly blow,Their half-knowledge held their hands back;They saved their lives but slightly wounded themselves.On the morrow those disciples, diminished in number,Raised lamentations in their houses.They went to Bayazid, thousands of men and women,Saying, “The two worlds are hidden in thy vesture;If this body of thine were that of a man,It would have perished of sword-wounds, like a man’s.”The man in his senses fought with him ‘beside himself,And thrust the thorn into his own eyes.”Ah! you who smite with your sword him beside himself,You smite yourself therewith; Beware!For he that is beside himself is annihilated and safe;Yea, he dwells in security forever.His form is vanished, he is a mere mirror;Nothing is seen in him but the reflection of another.If you spit at it, you spit at your own face,And if you hit that mirror, you hit yourself;And if you see an ugly face in it, ’tis your own,And if you see an ‘Isa there, you are its mother Mary.He is neither this nor that he is void of form;’Tis your own form which is reflected back to you.But when the discourse reaches this point, lip is closed;When pen reaches this point, it is split in twain.Close then your lips, though eloquence be possible.Keep silence; God knows the right way!This is followed by an anecdote of the Prophet appointing an Hudhaili youth to be captain of a band of warriors amongst whom were many older and more experienced soldiers, and of the objections made to this appointment, and of the Prophet’s answer to the objectors.Why the Prophet promoted the youth to command his seniors.The Prophet said, “O ye who regard only the outside,Regard him not as a youth void of talents.Many are they whose beards are black yet are old,Many too have white beards and hearts like pitch.I have made trial of his wisdom often and often,And that youth has shown himself old in his actions.Age consists in maturity of wisdom, O son,Not, in whiteness of the beard and hair.How can any one be older than Iblis?Yet, if he has no wisdom, he is naught.Suppose him an infant, if he has ‘Isa’s soul,He is pure from pride and from carnal lust.That whiteness of the hair is a sign of maturityOnly to purblind eyes whose vision is limited.Since that shortsighted one judges by outward signs,He seeks the right course by outward tokens.For his sake I said that if ye desire counselYe ought to make choice of an old man.He who has emerged from the veil of blind beliefBeholds by the light of God all things that exist.His pure light, without signs or tokens,Cleaves for him the rind and brings him to the kernel.To the regarder of externals, genuine and base coin are alike.How can he know what is inside the basket?Many are the gold coins made black with smoke,So that they elude the clutches of greedy thieves;Many are the copper coins gilded with gold,And sold as gold to men of slender wits.We who regard the inside of the world,We look at the heart and disregard the outside.The judges who confine their view to externalsAnd base their decisions on outward appearances,As they testify and make outward show of faith, 3Are straightway dubbed faithful by men of externals.Therefore these heretics, who regard only externals,Have secretly shed the blood of many true believers.Strive then to be old in wisdom and in faith,That, like Universal Reason, you may see within.” 4 
NOTES: 
Alluding to the story of the Kurd, Syad Abul-Wafa, Book i Story xiv. note.2. A hill in Mazandaran.3. “And some there are who say, ‘We believe in God and in the last day,’ yet they are not believers” (Koran ii. 7).4. Universal Reason, here applied to Muhammad. “The first thing which God created was (‘aql) Reason or Intelligence,” i.e., the Logos. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY V. The Three Fishes. 
This story, which is taken from the book of Kalila and Damnah, is as follows. There was in a secluded place a lake, which was fed by a running stream, and in this lake were three fishes, one very wise, the second half wise, and the third foolish. One day some fishermen passed by that lake, and having espied the fish, hastened home to fetch their nets. The fish also saw the fishermen and were sorely disquieted. The very wise fish, without a minute’s delay, quitted the lake and took refuge in the running stream which communicated with it, and thus escaped the impending danger. The half wise fish delayed doing anything till the fishermen actually made their appearance with their nets. He then floated upon the surface of the water, pretending to be dead, and the fisherman took him up and threw him into the stream, and by this device he saved his life. But the foolish fish did nothing but swim wildly about, and was taken and killed by the fishermen. 
The marks of the wise man, of the half wise, and of the fool.The wise man is he who possesses a torch of his own;He is the guide and leader of the caravan.That leader is his own director and light;That illuminated one follows his own lead.He is his own protector; do ye also seek protectionFrom that light whereon his soul is nurtured.The second, he, namely, who is half wise,Knows the wise man to be the light of his eyes.He clings to the wise man like a blind man to his guide,So as to become possessed of the wise man’s sight.But the fool, who has no particle of wisdom,Has no wisdom of his own, and quits the wise man.He knows nothing of the way, great or small,And is ashamed to follow the footsteps of the guide.He wanders into the boundless desert,Sometimes halting and despairing, sometimes running.He has no lamp wherewith to light himself on his way,Nor half a lamp which might recognize and seek light.He lacks wisdom, so as to boast of being alive,And also half wisdom, so as to assume to be dead?That half wise one became as one utterly deadIn order to rise up out of his degradation.If you lack perfect wisdom, make yourself as deadUnder the shadow of the wise, whose words give life.The fool is neither alive so as to companion with ‘Isa,Nor yet dead so as to feel the power of ‘Isa’s breath.His blind soul wanders in every direction,And at last makes a spring, but springs not upwards.The counsels of the bird.A man captured a bird by wiles and snares;The bird said to him, “O noble sir,In your time you have eaten many oxen and sheep,And likewise sacrificed many camels;You have never become satisfied with their meat,So you will not be satisfied with my flesh.Let me go, that I may give you three counsels,Whence you will see whether I am wise or foolish.The first of my counsels shall be given on your wrist,The second on your well-plastered roof,And the third I will give you from the top of a tree.On hearing all three you will deem yourself happy.As regards the counsel on your wrist, ’tis this.‘Believe not foolish assertions of any one!’”When he had spoken this counsel on his wrist, he flewUp to the top of the roof, entirely free.Then he said, “Do not grieve for what is past;When a thing is done, vex not yourself about it.”He continued, “Hidden inside this body of mineIs a precious pearl, ten drachms in weight.That jewel of right, belonged to you,Wealth for yourself and prosperity for your children.You have lost it, as it, was not fated you should get it,That pearl whose like can nowhere be found.”Thereupon the man, like a woman in her travail,Gave vent to lamentations and weeping.The bird said to him, “Did I not counsel you, saying,‘Beware of grieving over what is past and gone?’When ’tis past and gone, why sorrow for it?Either you understood not my counsel or are deaf.The second counsel I gave you was this, namely,‘Be not misguided enough to believe foolish assertions.’O fool, altogether I do not weigh three drachms,How can a pearl of ten drachms be within me?”The man recovered himself and said, “Well then,Tell me now your third good counsel!”The bird replied, “You have made a fine use of the others,That I should waste my third counsel upon you.To give counsel to a sleepy ignoramusIs to sow seeds upon salt land.Torn garments of folly and ignorance cannot be patched.O counselors, waste not the seed of counsel on them!” 
NOTES: 
Anvar i Suhaili. Book i. Story 15. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY VI. Moses and Pharaoh. 
Then follows a very long account of the dealings of Moses, an incarnation of true reason, with Pharaoh, the exponent of mere opinion or illusion. It begins with a long discussion between Moses and Pharaoh. Moses tells Pharaoh that both of them alike owe their bodies to earth and their souls to God, and that God is their only lord. Pharaoh replies that he is lord of Moses, and chides Moses for his want of gratitude to himself for nurturing him in his childhood. Moses replies that he recognizes no lord but God, and reminds Pharaoh how he had tried to kill him in his infancy. Pharaoh complains that he is made of no account by Moses, and Moses retorts that in order to cultivate a waste field it is necessary to break up the soil; and in order to make a good garment, the stuff must first be cut up; and in order to make bread, the wheat must first be ground in the mill, and so on. The best return he can make to Pharaoh for his hospitality to him in his infancy is to set him free from his lust-engendered illusions, like a fish from the fish-hook which has caught him. Pharaoh then twits Moses with his sorceries in changing his staff into a serpent, and thereby beguiling the people. Moses replies that all this was accomplished not by sorcery, like that of Pharaoh’s own magicians, but by the power of God, though Pharaoh could not see it, owing to his want of perception of divine things. The ear and the nose cannot see beautiful objects, but only the eye, and similarly the sensual eye, blinded by lust, is impotent to behold spiritual truth. On the other hand, men of spiritual insight, whose vision is purged from lust, become as it were all eyes, and no longer see double, but only the One sole real Being. Man’s body, it is true, is formed of earth, but by discipline and contrition it may be made to reflect spiritual verities, even as coarse and hard iron may be polished into a steel mirror. Pharaoh ought to cleanse the rust of evil — doing from his soul, and then he would be able to see the spiritual truths which Moses was displaying before him. The door of repentance is always open. Moses then promised that if Pharaoh would obey one admonition he should receive in return four advantages. Pharaoh was tempted by this promise, and asked what the admonition was. Moses answered that it was this, that Pharaoh should confess that there is no God except the One Creator of all things in heaven and on earth. Pharaoh then prayed him to expound the four advantages he had promised, saying that possibly they might cure him of infidelity, and cause him to become a vessel of mercy, instead of one of wrath. Moses then explained that they were as follows: 
(1) Health.(2) Long life, ending in the conviction that death is gain.Even as one who knows of a treasure hid in a ruined house pulls down the house to find that treasure, so does the wise man, full of years and experience, pull down the house of the body to gain the treasure of eternal life. The tradition “I was a hidden treasure,” bears on this matter.(3) A better kingdom than that of Egypt, one of peace in place of one of enmity and contention.(4) Perpetual youth.Pharaoh then proceeded to take counsel with his wife, Asiya, whether it would be advisable to quit his infidelity and believe in the promises of Moses. Asiya, being a pious woman and well inclined to Moses, whom she had nurtured in his infancy, urged him to do so, but Pharaoh said he would first consult his vazir Haman. Asiya had a bad opinion of Haman, whom she knew to be as blind to spiritual truths as Pharaoh himself, and she did her best to dissuade Pharaoh from consulting him. To illustrate Haman’s spiritual blindness, she told the story of a royal falcon who fell into the hands of an ignorant old woman. This old woman knew nothing of the virtues of a falcon, and was displeased at the falcon’s appearance, and said to it, “What was your mother about to leave your claws and beak so long?” She then proceeded to trim them short, according to her fancy, and of course spoiled the falcon for all purposes of falconry. Pharaoh, however, would not be diverted from his purpose of consulting Haman, and Asiya was fain to console herself with the reflection that like always herds with like, and so Pharaoh must needs consort with Haman, who was in so many respects a duplicate of himself. To illustrate this she recalled the story of a woman whose infant had crawled to the brink of a canal, where it persisted in remaining, at the imminent peril of its life, despite all her calls and entreaties. In her distress she asked aid of Ali, who told her to place another infant on the top of the bank. She did so, and her own infant, seeing its playfellow, left the brink of its own accord and came to join its fellow. The spirit of man is of like genus with the holy prophets, but man’s animal lust with the demons. And as things of like nature attract one another, so unlike things repel one another. Thus it is said that when holy men pray to be delivered from hell, hell also prays that they may be kept away from it. Pharaoh then proceeded to consult Haman, and Haman, on hearing that Moses had proposed to Pharaoh to humble himself and confess the supreme lordship of Allah, was indignant and rent his clothes, saying, “Is not the kingdom of Egypt thine? Art thou not mightier than this despicable fellow? Who is he to degrade Pharaoh from his ‘supreme lordship?’” So Pharaoh listened to Haman and refused to be converted to the true faith. Then Moses was much discouraged, but he was consoled by a voice from heaven assuring him that he was well-beloved of God, because in spite of disappointments and through good and evil he clung to God.On the tradition, “I was a hidden treasure and I desired to be known, and I created the world in order to be known”. 
Destroy your house, and with the treasure hidden in itYou will be able to build thousands of houses.The treasure lies under it; there is no help for it;Hesitate not to pull it down; do not tarry!For with the coin of that treasureA thousand houses can be built without labor.At last of a surety that house will be destroyed,And the divine treasure will be seen beneath it.But ‘twill not belong to you, because in truthThat prize is the wages for destroying the house.When one has not done the work he gets no wages;“Man gets nothing he has not worked for.”Then you will bite your finger, saying, “Alas!That bright moon was hidden under a cloud.I did not do what they told me for my good;Now house and treasure are lost and my hand is empty.”You have taken your house on lease or hired it;’Tis not your own property to buy and sell.As to the term of the lease, it is till your death;In that term you have to turn it to use.If before the end of the term of the leaseYou omit to derive profit from the house,Then the owner puts you out of it,And pulls it down himself to find the gold-mine.While you are now smiting your head in deep regret,And now tearing your beard to think of your folly,Saying, “Alas! that house belonged to me;I was blind and did not derive profit from it.Alas! the wind has carried off my dwellingForever! ‘O misery that rests on slaves!’In that house of mine I saw but forms and pictures;I was enchanted with that house so fleetin!I was ignorant of the treasure hidden beneath it,Otherwise I would have grasped an axe as a perfume.Ah! if I had administered the justice of the axe,I should now have been quit of sorrow.But I fixed my gaze on outward forms,Like an infant I sported with playthings.Well said the famous Hakim Sanai,‘Thou art a child; thy house is full of pictures.’In his divine poem he gives this advice,‘Sweep away the dust from thy house!’”They who recognize the almighty power of God do not ask where heaven is or where hell is.“O Pharaoh, if you are wise, I show you mercy;But if you are an ass, I give you the stick as an ass.So I will drive you out of your stable,Even as I make your head and ears bleed with my stick.In this stable asses and men alikeAre deprived of peace by your oppressions.See! I have brought a staff for the purpose of correctingEvery ass who does not prove tractable.It turns into a serpent in vengeance against you,Because you have become a serpent in deed and character.You are an evil serpent, swelled to the size of a hill.Yet look at the Serpent (constellation) in heaven.This staff is a foretaste to you of hell,Saying, ‘Ho, take refuge in the light!Otherwise you will fall into my jaws,And will find no escape from my clutches!’This staff even now became a serpent,So that you need not ask, ‘Where is God’s hell?’God makes a hell wheresover He wills;He makes the very sky a snare and trap for birds.He produces pains and aches in your teeth,So that you say, “Tis a hell and serpent’s bite.’Or again He makes your spittle as honey,So that you say, Tis heaven and wine of Paradise.’He makes sugar to grow in your mouth,That you may know the might of the divine decrees.Therefore, bite not the innocent with your teeth;Bear in mind the divine stroke that tarries not.”God made the Nile blood to the Egyptians,He preserved the Israelites from the peril,That you might know how God discernsBetween the wise and the foolish wayfarers.The Nile learned of God discernmentWhen it let the ones through and engulphed the others.God’s mercy made the Nile wise,His wrath made Cain foolish.Of His mercy He created wisdom in inanimate things,And of His wrath He deprived the wise of wisdom.Of His mercy wisdom accrued to inanimate things,As a chastisement He took wisdom from the wise.Here at His command wisdom was shed down like rain,Whilst there wisdom saw His wrath and fled away.Clouds and sun, and moon and lofty stars,All come and go in obedience to His ordinance;No one of them comes save at His appointed time;It lingers not behind nor anticipates that time.Whereas you understood not this secret, the prophetsHave instilled this knowledge into stone and staff;So that you may infer that other inanimate thingsWithout doubt resemble in this stones and staves.The obedience of stone and staff is shown to you,And informs you of that of other inanimate things.They cry, “We are all aware of God and obey Him;We are not destructive by mere fortuitous chance.”Thus you know the water of the Nile when in floodMade distinction between the Egyptians and the Israelites.You know the others are wise as earth, who, when cleft,Knew Qarun and swallowed him up in vengeance.Or like the moon, who heard the command and hastedTo sever itself into two halves in the sky.Or like the trees and stones, which in all placesWere seen to bow down at the feet of Mustafa.The arguments between a Sunni and a Materialist (Dahri) decided by the arbitrament of fire.Last night a Sunni said, “The world is transitory;The heavens will pass away; ‘God will be the heir.’”A philosopher replied, “How know you they are transitory?How knows the rain the transitory nature of the cloud?Are you not a mere mote floating in the sunbeams?How know you that the sun is transitory?A mere worm buried in a dung-heap,How can it know the origin and end of the earth?In blind belief you have accepted this from your father,And through folly have clung to it ever since.Tell me what is the proof of its transitoriness,Or else be silent and indulge not in idle talk.”The Sunni said, “One day I saw two personsEngaged in argument on this deep question,Yea, in dispute and controversy and argument.At last a crowd was gathered round them.I proceeded towards that companyTo inform myself of the subject of their discourse.One said, ‘This sky will pass away;Doubtless this building had a builder.’The other said, ‘It is eternal and without period;It had no builder, or it was its own builder.’The first said, ‘Do you then deny the Creator,The Bringer of day and night, the Sustainer of men?’He answered, ‘Without proof I will not listenTo what you say; ’tis only based on blind belief.Go! bring proof and evidence, for neverWill I accept this statement without proof.’He answered, ‘The proof is within my heart,Yea, my proofs are hidden in my heart.From weakness of vision you see not the new moon;If I see it, be not angry with me!’Much talk followed, and the people were perplexedAbout the origin and end of the revolving heavens.Then the first said, ‘O friend, within me is a proofWhich assures me of the transitoriness of the heavens.I hold it for certain, and the sign of certaintyIn him who possesses it is entering into fire.Know this proof is not to be expressed in speech,Any more than the feeling of love felt by lovers.The secret I labor to express is not revealedSave by the pallor and emaciation of my face.When the tears course down my cheeks,They are a proof of the beauty and grace of my beloved.’The other said, “I take not these for a proof,Though they may be a proof to common people.”The Sunni said, “When genuine and base coin boast,Saying, ‘Thou art false, I am good and genuine,’Fire is the test ultimately,When the two rivals are cast into the furnace.”Accordingly both of them entered the furnace,Both leapt into the fiery flame;And the philosopher was burnt to ashes,But the God-fearing Sunni was made fairer than before. 
NOTES: 
This story is an expansion of Koran xliii. 50 and following verses, and of Koran xi.2. See Koran xliii. 50.3. Compare the Hadis, “Die before you die,” i.e., mortify your carnal desires, and you will find spiritual treasure.4. The Turkish commentator translates ruh by Haqq Yoluna, “for the sake of truth,” “in the way of truth.” The Lucknow commentator, as usual, shirks the difficulty.5. Koran liii. 40.6. Koran xxxvi, 29.7. Koran liv. 1.8. Ghazzali divides the ancient Greek philosophers into three classes: Dahriyun, Tabayiun, and Ilahiyun. Schmolders, Ecoles Philosophiques, .9. Koran xv. 23. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY VII. The Courtier who quarreled with his Friend for saving his Life. 
A king was enraged against one of his courtiers, and drew his sword to slay him. The bystanders were all afraid to interfere, with the exception of one who boldly threw himself at the king’s feet and begged him to spare the offender. The king at once stayed his hand, and laid down his sword, saying, “As you have interceded for him, I would gladly pardon him, even if he had acted as a very demon. I cannot refuse your entreaties, because they are the same as my own. In reality, it is not you who make these entreaties for him, but I who make them through your mouth. I am the real actor in this matter and you are only my agent. Remember the text, ‘You shot not when you shot;’ 1 you are, as it were, the foam, and I the mighty ocean beneath it. The mercy you show to this offender is really shown by me, the king.” The offender was accordingly released and went his way; but, strange to say, he showed no gratitude to his protector, but, on the contrary, omitted to greet him when he met him, and in other ways refused to recognize the favor he had received from him. This behavior excited remark, and people questioned him as to the cause of his ingratitude to his benefactor. He replied, “I had offered up my life to the king when this man intervened. It was a moment when, according to the tradition, ‘I was with God in such a manner that neither prophet nor angel found entrance along with me,’ 2 and this man intruded between us. I desired no mercy save the king’s blows; I sought no shelter save the king. If the king had cut off my head he would have given me eternal life in return for it. My duty is to sacrifice my life; it is the king’s prerogative to give life. The night which is made dark as pitch by the king scorns the brightness of the brightest festal day. He who beholds the king is exalted above all thoughts of mercy and vengeance. Of a man raised to this exalted state no description is possible in this world, for he is hidden in God, and words like ‘mercy’ and ‘vengeance’ only express men’s partial and weak views of the matter. It is true ‘God taught Adam the names of all things,’ 3 but that means the real qualities of things, and not such names as ordinary men use, clad in the dress of human speech. The words and expressions we use have merely a relative truth, and do not unfold absolute truth.” 
He illustrates this by the reply made to the angel Gabriel by Abraham when he was cast into the fire by Nimrod. 4 Gabriel asked him if he could assist him, and Abraham answered, “No! I have no need of your help.” When one has attained union with God he has no need of intermediaries. Prophets and apostles are needed as links to connect ordinary men with God, but he who hears the “inner voice” within him has no need to listen to outward words, even of apostles. Although that intercessor is himself dwelling in God, yet my state is higher and more lovely than his. Though he is God’s agent, yet I desire not his intercession to save me from evil sent me by God, for evil at God’s hand seems to me good. What seems mercy and kindness to the vulgar seems wrath and vengeance to God-intoxicated saints. God’s severity and chastisements serve to exalt his saints, though they make the vulgar more ungodly than before, even as the water of the Nile was pure water to the Israelites, but blood to the Egyptians.Moses asks the Almighty, “Why hast Thou made men to destroy them?” 5 
Moses said, “O Lord of the day of account,Thou makest forms; wherefore, then, destroyest Thou them?Thou makest charming forms, both men and women;Wherefore, then, dost Thou lay them waste?”God answered, “I know that this query of thineProceeds not from negation or vain curiosity.Otherwise I should chastise and punish thee;Yea, I should rebuke thee for this question.But thou seekest to discover in my actionsThe ruling principle and the eternal mystery,In order to inform the people thereof,And to make ‘ripe’ every ‘raw’ person.Yea, O messenger, thou questionest me that I may revealMy ways to the people, though thou knowest them.O Moses, go and sow seed in the groundIn order to do justice to this question.”When Moses had sowed and his seed had grown up,He took a sickle and reaped the corn,And then a divine voice reached his ears:“Why hast thou sown and nurtured the corn,And then cut it down directly it was ripe?”Moses replied, “Lord, I cut it and lay it lowBecause here I have grain and straw.Grain is out of place in the straw-yard,And straw is useless in the wheat-barn.’Tis wrong to mix these two,It is needful to sift them one from the other.”God said, “From whom learnest thou this knowledgeWhereby thou hast constructed a threshing-floor?”Moses said, “O Lord, Thou hast given me discernment.”God said, “Then have not I also discernment?Amongst my creatures there are pure spirits,And also dark and befouled spirits.The oyster-shells are not all of the same value;Some contain pearls, and others black stones.It is needful to discern the bad from the good,Just as much as to sift wheat from straw.The people of this world exist in order to manifestAnd to disclose the ‘hidden treasure.’Read, ‘I was a hidden treasure, and desired to be known;Hide not the hidden treasure, but disclose it.Your true treasure is hidden under a false one,Just as butter is hidden within the substance of milk.The false one is this transitory body of yours,The true one your divine soul.Long time this milk is exposed to view,And the soul’s butter is hidden and of no account.Stir up your milk assiduously with knowledge,So that what is hidden in it may be disclosed;Because this mortal is the guide to immortality,As the cries of revellers indicate the cup-bearer.” 
NOTES: 
Koran viii. 17.2. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 120.3. Koran ii. 29.4. See Koran xxi. 68, and the Commentators thereon.5. So Job x. 8: “ Thy hands have made me, yet Thou dost destroy me.” 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY VIII. The Prince who, after having been beguiled by a Courtesan, returned to his True Love. 
A certain king dreamed that his dearly beloved son, a youth of great promise, had come to an untimely end. On awaking he was rejoiced to find that his son was still alive; but he reflected that an accident might carry him off at any moment, and therefore decided to marry him without delay, in order that the succession might be secured. Accordingly he chose the daughter of a pious Darvesh as a bride for his son, and made preparations for the wedding. But his wife and the other ladies of his harem did not approve of the match, considering it below the dignity of the prince to marry the daughter of a beggar. The king rebuked them, saying that a Darvesh who had renounced worldly wealth for the sake of God was not to be confounded with an ordinary beggar, and insisted on the consummation of the marriage. After the marriage the prince refused to have anything to do with his bride, though she was very fair to look on, and he carried on an intrigue with an ugly old woman who had bewitched him by sorcery. After a year, however, the king found some physicians who succeeded in breaking the spell, and the prince returned to his senses, and his eyes were opened to the superior attractions of his wife, and he renounced his ugly paramour and fell in love with his wife. This is a parable, the true wife being the Deity, the old paramour the world, and the physicians the prophets and saints. Another illustration is a child who played at besieging a mimic fort with his fellows, and succeeded in capturing it and keeping the others out. At this moment God “bestowed on him wisdom, though a child,” 1 and it became to him a day “when a man flees from his brethren,” 2 and he recognized the emptiness of this idle sport, and engaged in the pursuit of holiness and piety. This is followed by an anecdote of a devotee who had so concentrated his thoughts on things above that he was utterly careless of all earthly troubles, and was cheerful and rejoicing even in the midst of a severe famine. 
The world is the outward form of “Universal Reason” (Muhammad), and he who grieves him must expect trouble in the world. 3The whole world is the outward form of Universal Reason,For it is the father of all creatures of reason.When a man acts basely towards Universal Reason,Its form, the world, shows its teeth at him.Be loyal to this father and renounce disobedience,That this earthy house may furnish you golden carpets.Then the judgment-day will be the “cash of your state,”Earth and heavens will be transfigured before you. 4I am ever in concord with this father of ours,And earth ever appears to me as a Paradise.Each moment a flesh form, a new beauty,So that weariness vanishes at these ever-fresh sights.I see the world filled with blessings,Fresh waters ever welling up from new fountains.The sound of those waters reaches my ears,My brain and senses are intoxicated therewith.Branches of trees dancing like fair damsels,Leaves clapping hands like singers.These glories are a mirror shining through a veil;If the mirror were unveiled, how would it be?I tell not one in a thousand of them,Because every ear is stopped with doubt.To men of illusions these tales are mere good tidings,But men of knowledge deem them not tidings, but ready cash. 
This is illustrated by an anecdote of Ezra or ‘Uzair and his sons.5 On his return from Babylon, whither he had been carried captive by Nebuchadnezzar, Ezra beheld the ruins of Jerusalem, and he said, “How shall God give life to this city after it hath been dead?” And God caused him to die for a hundred years, and then raised him again to life, and said to him, “How long hast thou waited?” He said, “I have waited a day.” God said, “Nay, thou hast waited a hundred years. Look at the dead bones of thine ass; we will raise them and clothe them with flesh.” Ezra was raised from the dead as a young man, whereas his sons were then, of course, very old men. They met him, and asked if he had seen their father. He replied, “I have seen him; he is coming.” Some of them rejoiced, considering this good news; but others, who had loved him more dearly, knew him and fainted with joy. What was mere good tidings to the men of opinion was the “ready money of their state” to men of real knowledge. 
NOTES: 
Koran xix. 13.2. Koran lxxx. 34.3. “Aql i Kull, Universal Reason, or the Logos, was identified with the prophet Muhammad.”4. Koran xiv. 49.5. This story comes from Koran ii. 261. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY IX. The Mule and the Camel. 
A mule said to a camel, “How is it that I am always stumbling and falling down, whilst you never make a false step?” The camel replied, “My eyes are always directed upwards, and I see a long way before me, while your eyes look down, and you only see what is immediately under your feet.” The mule admitted the truth of the camel’s statement, and besought him to act as his guide in future, and the camel consented to do so. Just so partial reason cannot see beyond the grave, but real reason looks onward to the day of judgment, and, therefore, is enabled to steer a better course in this world. For this cause, men having only partial reason or mere opinion of their own ought to follow the guidance of the saints, according to the text, “O believers, enter not upon any affair ere God and his Apostle lead the way.” 1Then follows another anecdote of an Egyptian who asked an Israelite to draw water for him from the Nile, because the water of the Nile turned to blood when drawn by an Egyptian. Afterwards the Egyptian asked the Israelite to pray for him, and the Israelite admonished him to renounce his egotism and conceit of his own existence, which blinded his eyes to divine verities. In illustration of this he tells the same story of an adulterous woman, which is known as the “Merchant’s Tale” in Chaucer. This woman, desiring to carry on an intrigue with her paramour, climbed up a pear-tree to gather the fruit, and when she had reached the top she looked down, and pretended that she saw her husband misconducting himself with another woman. The husband assured her there was no one but himself there, and desired her to come down and see for herself. She came down and admitted there was no one there. Her husband then, at her request, ascended the tree, and she at once called her paramour, and began to amuse herself with him. Her husband saw her from his post in the tree, and began to abuse her; but she declared there was no man with her, and that the pear-tree made her husband see double, just as it had made her see double previously. 
The evolution of man.First he appeared in the class of inorganic things, 2Next he passed therefrom into that of plants.For years he lived as one of the plants,Remembering naught of his inorganic state so different;And when he passed from the vegetive to the animal stateHe had no remembrance of his state as a plant,Except the inclination he felt to the world of plants,Especially at the time of spring and sweet flowers.Like the inclination of infants towards their mothers,Which know not the cause of their inclination to the breast,Or the excessive inclination of young disciplesTowards their noble and illustrious teachers.The disciple’s partial reason comes from that Reason,The disciple’s shadow is from that bough.When the shadows in the disciples cease,They know the reason of their attachment to the teachers.For, O fortunate one, how can the shadow move,Unless the tree that casts the shadow move as well?Again, the great Creator, as you know,Drew man out of the animal into the human state.Thus man passed from one order of nature to another,Till he became wise and knowing and strong as he is now.Of his first souls he has now no remembrance,And he will be again changed from his present soul.In order to escape from his present soul full of lustsHe must behold thousands of reasonable souls.Though man fell asleep and forgot his previous states,Yet God will not leave him in this self-forgetfulness;And then he will laugh at his own former stateSaying, “ What mattered my experiences when asleep?When I had forgotten my prosperous condition,And knew not that the grief and ills I experiencedWere the effect of sleep and illusion and fancy?In like manner this world, which is only a dream.Seems to the sleeper as a thing enduring for everBut when the morn of the last day shall dawn,The sleeper will escape from the cloud of illusion;Laughter will overpower him at his own fancied grievesWhen he beholds his abiding home and place.Whatever you see in this sleep, both good and evil,Will all be exposed to view on the resurrection day.Whatever you have done during your sleep in the worldWill be displayed to you clearly when you awake.Imagine not that these ill deeds of yours exist notIn this sleep of yours, and will not be revealed to you.But your present laughter will turn to weeping and woeOn the day of revealing, O you who oppress captives!Your present wailing and sorrow and grieves,On the other hand, will be joy when you awake,O you, who have rent the garments of many Josephs,You will rise from your heavy sleep as a wolf.Your bad qualities will rise in the shape of wolvesAnd rend you limb from limb in vengeance.By the law of retaliation blood sleeps not after death;Say not, “I shall die and obtain pardon.”The retaliation of this world is illusive,It is mere sport compared to the retaliation to come.Therefore God calls the world “a pastime and a sport,” 3For punishment in this world is sport compared to that.Here punishment is as the repression of quarrels,There it is as castration or circumcision. 
But this discourse is endless, O Moses,Go and leave these asses to their grazing!Let them fatten themselves with the food they love,For they are very wolves and objects of my wrath.Zu’l Qarnain at Mount Qaf. 4Zu’l Qarnain journeyed to Mount Qaf;He saw it was formed of a bright emerald,Forming as it were a ring round the world,Whereat all people are filled with wonder.He said, “Thou mighty hill, what are other hills?Before thee they are mere playthings.”The Mount replied, “Those hills are my veins,But they are not like me in beauty and importance.A hidden vein from me runs to every city,The quarters of the world are bound to my veins.When God desires an earthquake under any city,He bids me shake one of my veins.Then in anger I shake that veinWhich is connected with that particular city.When He says, ‘Enough,’ my vein remains still,I remain still, and then haste to perform my work.Now still like a plaster, and now operating;Now still like thought, and then speaking my thought.But they who are void of reason imagineThat these earthquakes proceed from earth’s vapors.” 
Just so an ant who saw a pen writing on paper,Delivered himself to another ant in this way‘That pen is making very wonderful figures,Like hyacinths and lilies and roses.’The other said, ‘The finger is the real worker,The pen is only the instrument of its working.’A third ant said, ‘ No; the action proceeds from the arm,The weak finger writes with the arm’s might.’So it went on upwards, till at lastA prince of the ants, who had some witSaid, ‘Ye regard only the outward form of this marvel,Which form becomes senseless in sleep and death.Form is only as a dress or a staff in the hand,It is only from reason and mind these figures proceed.’But he knew not that this reason and mindWould be but lifeless things without God’s impulsion.The angel Gabriel appears to the Prophet Muhammad.Mustafa said to the angel Gabriel,“O friend, show me thy form as it really is;Show it to me openly and perceptibly,That I may behold thee with my eyes.”Gabriel said, “Thou canst not do so, thou art too weak,Thy senses are exceeding weak and frail.”Muhammad said, “Show it, that this body of mine may seeTo what extent its senses are frail and impotent.True, man’s bodily senses are frail,But he possesses within him a mighty property. 5This body resembles flint and steel,But like them it has the power of kindling fire.Flint and steel are able to generate fire,From them springs fire which can destroy its parents.”As he continued importuning him, Gabriel displayedHis awful form, whereat the mountains were rent asunder.It occupied the sky from east to west.And Mustafa swooned with fear.When Gabriel beheld him swooning with fear,He came and clasped him in his arms.Address to Husamu-’d-Din.O light of God, Husamu-’d-Din, admitThis ass’s head into that melon-garden!For when this ass is killed in the slaughter-houseThat kitchen will bestow upon him a new existence.From me proceeds the form, from thee the spirit;Nay, form and spirit both proceed from thee!Thou art as Muhammad in heaven, O brilliant Sun!Be also as Muhammad on earth forever and ever!So that earth and heaven on high may be unitedWith one heart, one worship, one aspiration!And schism and polytheism and duality disappear,And Unity abide in the Real Spiritual Being!When my spirit recognizes thy spirit,We remember our essential union and origin. 
NOTES: 
Koran xlix. 1.2. See the parallel passage in Gulshan i Raz, I. 317, and the note. It is based on the Aristotelian doctrine of the ascending grades of the soul, or vital principle.3. Koran xxix. 64.4. Zu’l Qarnain, Chaucer’s Dulkarn, means “He of the two horns,” and here denotes Alexander the Great.5. See the parallel passage in Gulshan i Raz, I. 431, and the note thereon. This property is the mystic “inner light” or spiritual intuition. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





BOOK V. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY I. The Prophet and his Infidel Guest. 
AFTER the usual address to Husamu-’d-Din follows a comment on the precept addressed to Abraham, “Take four birds and draw them towards thee, and cut them in pieces.”1 The birds are explained to be the duck of gluttony, the cock of concupiscence, the peacock of ambition and ostentation, and the crow of bad desires, and this is made the text of several stories. Beginning with gluttony, the poet tells the following story to illustrate the occasion of the Prophet’s uttering the saying, Infidels eat with seven bellies, but the faithful with one.” One day some infidels begged food and lodging of the Prophet. The Prophet was moved by their entreaties, and desired each of his disciples to take one of the infidels to his house and feed and lodge him, remarking that it was their duty to show kindness to strangers at his command, as much as to do battle with his foes. So each disciple selected one of the infidels and carried him off to his house; but there was one big and coarse man, a very giant Og, whom no one would receive, and the Prophet took him to his own house. In his house the Prophet had seven she-goats to supply his family with milk, and the hungry infidel devoured all the milk of those seven goats, to say nothing of bread and other viands. He left not a drop for the Prophet’s family, who were therefore much annoyed with him, and when he retired to his chamber one of the servant-maids locked him in. During the night the infidel felt very unwell in consequence of having overeaten himself, and tried to get out into the open air, but was unable to do so, owing to the door being locked. Finally, he was very sick, and defiled his bedding. In the morning he was extremely ashamed, and the moment the door was opened he ran away. The Prophet was aware of what had happened, but let the man escape, so as not to put him to shame. After he had gone the servants saw the mess he had made, and informed the Prophet of it; but the Prophet made light of it, and said he would clean it up himself. His friends were shocked at the thought of the Prophet soiling his sacred hands with such filth, and tried to prevent him, but he persisted in doing it, calling to mind the text, “As thou livest, O Muhammad, they were bewildered by drunkenness,” 2 and being, in fact, urged to it by a divine command. While he was engaged in the work the infidel came back to look for a talisman which he had left behind him in his hurry to escape, and seeing the Prophet’s occupation he burst into tears, and bewailed his own filthy conduct. The Prophet consoled him, saying that weeping and penitence would purge the offence, for God says, “Little let them laugh, and much let them weep;” 3 and again, “Lend God a liberal loan;” 4 and again, “God only desireth to put away filthiness from you as His household, and with cleansing to cleanse you.” 5 Prophet then urged him to bear witness that God was the Lord, even as was done by the sons of Adam, 6 explained how the outward acts of prayer and fasting bear witness of the spiritual light within. After being nurtured on this spiritual food the infidel confessed the truth of Islam, and renounced his infidelity and gluttony. He returned thanks to the Prophet for bringing him to the knowledge of the true faith and regenerating him, even as ‘Isa had regenerated Lazarus. The Prophet was satisfied of his sincerity, and asked him to sup with him again. At supper he drank only half the portion of milk yielded by one goat, and steadfastly refused to take more, saying he felt perfectly satisfied with the little he had already taken. The other guests marveled much to see his gluttony so soon cured, and were led to reflect on the virtues of the spiritual food administered to him by the Prophet.: Outward acts bear witness of the state of the heart within. 
Prayer and fasting and pilgrimage and holy warBear witness of the faith of the heart.Giving alms and offerings and quitting avariceAlso bear witness of the secret thoughts.So, a table spread for guests serves as a plain sign,Saying, “O guest, I am your sincere well-wisher.”So, offerings and presents and oblationsBear witness, saying, “I am well pleased with you.”Each of these men lavishes his wealth or pains,What means it but to say, “I have a virtue within me,Yea, a virtue of piety or liberality,Whereof my oblations and fasting bear witness”?Fasting proclaims that he abstains from lawful food,And that therefore he doubtless avoids unlawful food.And his alms say, “He gives away his own goods;It is therefore plain that he does not rob others.”If he acts thus from fraud, his two witnesses(Fasting and alms) are rejected in God’s court;If the hunter scatters grainNot out of mercy, but to catch game;If the cat keeps fast, and remains stillIn fasting only to entrap unwary birds;Making hundreds of people suspicious,And giving a bad name to men who fast and are liberal;Yet the grace of God, despite this fraud,May ultimately purge him from all this hypocrisy.Mercy may prevail over vengeance, and give the hypocriteSuch light as is not possessed by the full moon.God may purge his dealings from that hypocrisy,And in mercy wash him clean of that defilement.In order that the pardoning grace of God may be seen,God pardons all sins that need pardon.Wherefore God rains down water from the sign Pisces,To purify the impure from their impurities. 7Thus acts and words are witnesses of the mind within,From these two deduce inferences as to the thoughts.When your vision cannot penetrate within,Inspect the water voided by the sick man.Acts and words resemble the sick man’s water,Which serves as evidence to the physician of the body.But the physician of the spirit penetrates the soul,And thence ascertains the man’s faith.Such an one needs not the evidence of fair acts and words“Beware of such, they spy out the heart.”Require this evidence of act and word only from oneWho is not joined to the divine Ocean like a stream.But the light of the traveler arrived at the goal,Verily that light fills deserts and wastes.That witness of his is exempt from bearing witness,And from all trouble and risk and good works.Since the brilliance of that jewel beams forth,It is exempted from these obligations.Wherefore require not from him act and word evidence,Because both worlds through him bloom like roses.What is this evidence but manifestation of hidden things,Whether it be evidence in word, or deed, or otherwise?Accidents serve only to manifest the secret essence;The essential quality abides, and accidents pass away.This mark of gold endures not the touchstone,But only the gold itself, genuine and undoubted.These prayers and holy war and fastingWill not endure, only the noble soul endures.The soul exhibits acts and words of this sort,Then it rubs its substance on the touchstone of God’s command,Saying, “My faith is true, behold my witnesses!”But witnesses are open to suspicion.Know that witnesses must be purified,And their purification is sincerity, on that you may depend.The witness of word consists in speaking the truth,The witness of acts in keeping one’s promises.If the witness of word lie, its evidence is rejected,And if the witness of act play false, it is rejected.Your words and acts must be without self-contradictionIn order to be accepted without question.“Your aims are different,” 8 and you contradict yourselves,You sew by day, and tear to pieces by night.How can God listen to such contradictory witness,Unless He be pleased to decide on it in mercy?Act and word manifest the secret thoughts and mind,Both of them expose to view the veiled secret.When your witnesses are purified they are accepted,Otherwise they are arrested and kept in durance.They enter into conflict with you, O stiff-necked one;“Stand aloof and wait for them, for they too wait.” 9Prayers for spiritual enlightenment.O God, who hast no peer, bestow Thy favor upon me;Since Thou hast with this discourse put a ring in my ear,Take me by the ear, and draw me into that holy assemblyWhere Thy saints in ecstasy drink of Thy pure wine!Now that Thou hast caused me to smell its perfume,Withhold not from me that musky wine, O Lord of faithOf Thy bounty all partake, both men and women,Thou art ungrudging in bounties, O Hearer of prayer.Prayers are granted by Thee before they are uttered,Thou openest the door to admit hearts every moment!How many letters Thou writest with Thy Almighty pen!Through marveling thereat stones become as wax.Thou writest the Nun of the brow, the Sad of the eye,And the Jim of the ear, to amaze reason and sense.These letters exercise and perplex reason;Write on, O skilful Fair-writer!Imprinting every moment on Not-being the fair formsOf the world of ideals, to confound all thought! 10Yea, copying thereon the fair letters of the page of ideals,To wit, eye and brow and moustache and mole!For me, I will be a lover of Not-being, not of existence,Because the beloved of Not-being is more blessed. 11God made reason a reader of all these letters,To suggest to it reflections on that outpouring of grace. 12Reason, like Gabriel, learns day by dayIts daily portion from the “Indelible Tablet.” 13Behold the letters written without hands on Not-being!Behold the perplexity of mankind at those letters!Every one is bewildered by these thoughts,And digs for hidden treasure in hope to find it.This bewilderment of mankind as to their true aims is compared to the bewilderment of men in the dark looking in all directions for the Qibla, and recalls the text, “O the misery that rests upon my servants.” 14Then follow reflections on the sacrifice by Abraham of the peacock of ambition and ostentation. Next comes a discourse on the thesis that all men can recognize the mercies of God and the wrath of God; but God’s mercies are often hidden in His chastisements, and vice versa, and it is only men of deep spiritual discernment who can recognize acts of mercy and acts of wrath concealed in their opposites. The object of this concealment is to try and test men’s dispositions; according to the text, “To prove which of you will be most righteous in deed.” 15 
NOTES: 
Koran ii. 262.2. Koran xv. 72.3. Koran ix. 33.4. Koran lxxiii. 20.5. Koran xxxiii. 33.6. Koran vii. 171.7. “Islam is the baptism of God” (Koran ii. 132).8. Koran xcii. 4.9. Koran xxxii. 30. i.e., Wait thou for their punishment, as they wait for thy downfall (Rodwell).10. Here we have another Platonic doctrine. “Some say the belief of the Sufis is the same as that of the Ishraqin (Platonists).” Dabistan i Muzahib, by Shea and Troyer, iii. 281.11. I.e., I will recognize the nonentity of all this phenomenal being, and court self-annihilation.12. The Bulaq translator renders An naward thus.13. The “Indelible Tablet” (of God’s decrees) is here applied to the Logos-the channel through whom God renews the “world of creation” day by day.14. Koran xxxvi. 29.15. Koran lxvii. 2. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY II. The Arab and his Dog. 
The doctrine of the Mu’tazilites, 1 mentioned, that all men’s intellects are alike and equal at birth, is again controverted, and the poet dwells on the essential differences which characterize the intellects akin to Universal Reason or the Logos, and those swayed by partial or carnal reason; the former, like the children of Israel, seeking exaltation through self-abasement; and the others, like Pharaoh, running after worldly rank and power, to their own destruction. In order to make probation of men, as already explained, God fills the world with deceptions, 2 making apparent blessings destructive to us, and apparent evils salutary. On the other hand, if men try to deceive God, they fail signally. Hypocritical weeping and wailing like that of Joseph’s brethren is at once detected by God. Thus a certain Arab had a dog to which he was much attached; but one day the dog died of hunger. He at once began to weep and wail, and disturbed the whole neighborhood by his ostentatious grief One of the neighbors came and inquired into the matter, and on hearing that the dog had died of hunger, he asked the Arab why he had not fed him from the wallet of food which he had in his hand. The Arab said that he had collected this food to support himself, and made it a principle not to part with any of it to any one who could not pay for it; but that, as his tears cost him nothing, he was pouring them forth in token of the sorrow he felt for his dog’s death. The neighbor, on hearing this, rebuked him for his hypocrisy, and went his way. Then follows a commentary on the text, “Almost would the infidels strike thee down with their very looks when they hear the reading of the Koran.” 3
NOTES: 
The Mu’tazilites were one of the principal unorthodox sects. See Sale, Prelim. Disc., .2. “Of them who devise stratagems, God is beast” (Koran iii. 47).3. Koran lxviii. 51. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY III. The Sage and the Peacock. 
A sage went out to till his field, and saw a peacock busily engaged in destroying his own plumage with his beak. At seeing this insane self-destruction the sage could not refrain himself, but cried out to the peacock to forbear from mutilating himself and spoiling his beauty in so wanton a manner. The peacock then explained to him that the bright plumage which he admired so much was a fruitful source of danger to its unfortunate owner, as it led to his being constantly pursued by hunters, whom he had no strength to contend against; and he had accordingly decided on ridding himself of it with his own beak, and making himself so ugly that no hunter would in future care to molest him. The poet proceeds to point out that worldly cleverness and accomplishments and wealth endanger man’s spiritual life, like the peacock’s plumage; but, nevertheless, they are appointed for our probation, and without such trials there can be no virtue. 
“There is no monkery in Islam.”1Tear not thy plumage off it cannot be replaced;Disfigure not thy face in wantonness, O fair one!That face which is bright as the forenoon sun,To disfigure it were a grievous sin.‘Twere paganism to mar such a face as thine!The moon itself would weep to lose sight of it!Knowest thou not the beauty of thine own face?Quit this temper that leads thee to war with thyself!It is the claws of thine own foolish thoughtsThat in spite wound the face of thy quiet soul.Know such thoughts to be claws fraught with poison,Which score deep wounds on the face of thy soul.Rend not thy plumage off, but avert thy heart from itFor hostility between them is the law of this holy war.Were there no hostility, that war would be impossible.lladst thou no lust, obedience to the law could not be. 2Hadst thou no concupiscence there could be no abstinence.Where no antagonist, what need is there of armies?Ah! make not thyself an eunuch, 3 not a monk,Because chastity is mortgaged to lust.Without lust denial of lust is impossibleNo man can display bravery against the dead.God says, “Expend;” 4 wherefore earn money.Since expenditure is impossible without previous gain?Although the passage contains only the word “Expend,”Read “Acquire first, and then expend.”In like manner, when the King of kings says “Abstain,” 5It implies an object of desire wherefrom to abstain.Again, “Eat ye,” is said recognising the snares of lust,And afterwards, “ Exceed not,” 6 to enjoin temperance.When there is no subject,The existence of a predicate is not possible. 7When thou endurest not the pains of abstinenceAnd fulfillest not the terms, thou gainest no reward.How easy those terms! how abundant that reward!A reward that enchants the heart and charms the soul!This is followed by the admonition that the only way to be safe from one’s internal enemies is to annihilate self, a,nd to be absorbed in the eternity of God, as the light of the stars is lost in the light of the noonday sun. Everything but God is at once preyed on by others, and itself preys on others, like the fowl which, when catching a worm, was itself caught by a cat. Men are so intent on their own low objects of pursuit that they see not their foes who are trying to make them their prey. Thus it is said, “Before them have we set a barrier, and behind them a barrier, so that they shall not see.” 8 Persons who lust after the vile pleasures of this world, and desire long life, not to serve God, but to satisfy their own carnal lusts, resemble the crow slain by Abraham, because he only lived for the sake of carrion; or Iblis, who prayed to be respited till the day of judgment, not for the purpose of reforming himself but only to do mischief to mankind. 9 
Prayers to God to change our base inclinations and give us higher aspirations.O Thou that changest earth into gold,And out of other earth madest the father of mankind,Thy business is changing things and bestowing favors,My business is mistakes and forgetfulness and error.Change my mistakes and forgetfulness to knowledge;I am altogether vile, make me temperate and meek.O Thou that convertest salt earth into bread,And bread again into the life of men;Thou who madest the erring soul a guide to men,And him that erred from the way a prophet; 10Thou makest some earth-born men as heaven,And muitipliest heaven-born saints on earth!But whoso seeks his water of life in worldly joys,To him comes death quicker than to the rest.The eyes of the heart which behold the heavensSee that the Almighty Alchemist is ever working here.Mankind are ever being changed, and God’s elixirJoins the body’s garment without aid of needle.On the day that you entered upon existence,You were first fire, or earth, or air.If you had continued in that, your original state,How could you have arrived at this dignity of humanity?But through change your first existence remained notIn lien thereof God gave you a better existenceIn like manner He will give you thousands of existences,One after another, the succeeding ones better than the former.Regard your original state, not the mean states,For these mean states remove you from your origin.As these mean states increase, union recedes;As they decrease, the unction of union increases.From knowing means and causes holy bewilderment fails;Yea, the bewilderment that leads you to God’s presence.You have obtained these existences after annihilations;Wherefore, then, do you shrink from annihilation?What harm have these annihilations done youThat you cling so to present existence, O simpleton?Since the latter of your states were better than the former,Seek annihilation and adore change of state.You have already seen hundreds of resurrectionsOccur every moment from your origin till now;One from the inorganic state to the vegetive state,From the vegetive state to the animal state of trial;Thence again to rationality and good discernment;Again you will rise from this world of sense and form.Ah! O crow, give up this life and live anew!In view of God’s changes cast away your life!Choose the new, give up the old,For each single present year is better than three past. 
This is followed by a commentary on the saying of the Prophet, “Pity the pious man who falls into sin, and the rich man who falls into poverty, and the wise man who falls into the company of fools.” This is illustrated by an anecdote of a young deer who was placed in the asses stable, and jeered at and maltreated by them. This suggests. 
NOTES: 
A Hadis.2. Cp. Bp. Butler, “On a state of probation as implying trial and danger” (Analogy, Chap. iv. Pt. 1).3. Probably referring to Origin.4. Koran ii. 264.5. Koran iii. 200.6. Koran vi. 142: “Eat of their fruit, but be not prodigal, and exceed not.”7. Or, “If there be no supporter, there can be nothing supported.”8. Koran xxxvi. 8.9. Koran vii. 13.10. Koran xciii. 7. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY IV. Muhammad Khwarazm Shah and the Rafizis of Sabzawar. 
Muhammad Shah was the last prince but one of the Khwarazm dynasty of Balkh, to which family both the poet’s mother and grandmother belonged. He was the reigning prince in AD. 1209, the year in which the poet’s father fled from Balkh, and was defeated by Chingiz Khan a year or two later. In one of his campaigns Muhammad Shah captured the city of Sabzawar, in Khorasan, which city as inhabited by Rafizis or rank Shi’as, naturally most obnoxious to a Sunni prince claiming descent from the first Khahif Abu Bakr. After the city was taken the inhabitants came out, and proceeded with all humility to beg their lives, offering to pay any amount of ransom and tribute that he might impose upon them. But the prince replied that he would spare their lives only on one condition, viz., that they produced from Sabzawar a man bearing the name Abu Bakr. They represented to him that it would be impossible to find in the whole city a single man bearing a name so hateful to the Shi’as; but the prince was inexorable, and refused to alter the conditions. So they went and searched all the neighbourhood, and at last found a traveler lying at the roadside at the point of death, who bore the name of Abu Bakr. As he was unable to walk, they placed him on a bier and carried him into the king’s presence. The king reproached them for their contempt and neglect of this pious Sunni, the only true heart amongst them, and reminded them of the saying of the Prophet, “God regards not your outward show and your wealth, but your hearts and your deeds.” In this parable, says the poet, Sabzawar is the world, the poor Sunni the man of God, despised and rejected of men, and the king is God Almighty, who seeks a true heart amongst evil men. 
Satan’s snares for mankind.Thus spake cursed Iblis to the Almighty,“I want a mighty trap to catch human game withal.”God gave him gold and silver and troops of horsesSaying, “You can catch my creatures with these.”Iblis said, “Bravo!” but at the same time hung his lip,And frowned sourly like a bitter orange.Then God offered gold and jewels from precious minesTo that laggard in the faith,Saying, “Take these other traps, O cursed one.”But Iblis said, “Give me more, O blessed Defender.”God gave him succulent and sweet and costly wines,And also store of silken garments.But Iblis said, “ O Lord, I want more aids than these,In order to bind men in my twisted ropeSo firmly that Thy adorers, who are valiant menMay not, man-like, break my bonds asunder.”When at last God showed him the beauty of women,Which bereaves men of reason and self-control,Then Iblis clapped his hands and began to dance,Saying, “Give me these; I shall quickly prevail with these!”This is followed by comments on the text, “Of goodliest fabric we created man, and then brought him down to the lowest of the low, saving those who believe and do the things that are right;” 1 and on the verses,“If thou goest the road, they will show thee the road;If thou becomest naught, they will turn thee to being.” 
NOTES: 
Koran xcv. 4. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY V. The Man who claimed to be a Prophet. 
A man cried out to the people, “I am a prophet; yea, the most excellent of the prophets.” The people seized him by the collar, saying, “How are you any more a prophet than we are?” He replied, “Ye came to earth from the spirit-world as sleeping children, seeing nothing of the way; but I came hither with my eyes open, and marked all the stages of the way like a guide.” On this they led him before the king, and begged the king to punish him. The king, seeing that he was very infirm, took pity on him, and led him apart and asked him where his home was. The man replied, “O king, my home is in the house of peace (heaven), and I am come thence into this house of reproach.” The king then asked him what he had been eating to make him rave as he did, and he said if he lived on mere earthly bread he should not have claimed to be a prophet. His preaching was entirely thrown away on worldly men, who only desire to hear news of gold or women, 1 and are annoyed with all who speak to them of the eternal life to come. They cleave to the present life so fast that they hate those who tell them of another. They say, “Ye are telling us old fables and raving idly;” and when they see pious men prospering they envy them, and, like Satan, become more opposed to them. God said, “What thinkest thou of him who holdeth back a servant of God when he prayeth? “ 2 
The king then said to him, “What is this inspiration of yours, and what profit do you derive from it?” The man answered, “What profit is there that I do not derive from it? I grant I am not rich in worldly wealth, yet the inspiration God teaches me is surely as precious as that which He taught the bees. 3 God taught them to make wax and honey, and He teaches me nobler things than these. Whoso has his face reddened with celestial wine is a prophet of like disposition with Muhammad, and whoso is unaffected by that spiritual drink is to be accounted an enemy to God and man.” 
The Prophet’s prayer for the envious people.O Thou that givest aliment and power and stability,Set free the people from their instability.To the soul that is bent double by envyGive uprightness in the path of duty,Give them self-control, “weigh down their scales,” 4Release them from the arts of deceivers.Redeem them from envying, O gracious One,That through envy they be not stoned like Iblis. 5Even in their fleeting prosperity, see how the peopleBurn up wealth and men through envy!See the kings who lead forth their armiesTo slay their own people from envy!Lovers of sweethearts have conceived jealousy,And attempted one another’s lives,Read “ Wais and Ramin” and “Khosrau and Shirin”To see what these fools have done to one another.Lovers and beloved have both perished;And not themselves only, but their love as well.’Tis God alone who agitates these nonentitiesMaking one nonentity fall in love with another.In the heart that is no heart envy comes to a head,Thus Being troubles nonentity.This is followed by an anecdote of a lover who recounted to his mistress all the services he had done, and all the toils he had undergone for her sake, and inquired if there was anything else he could do to testify the sincerity of his love. His mistress replied, “All these things you have done are but the branches of love; you have not yet attained to the root, which is to give up life itself for the sake of your beloved.” The lover accordingly gave up his life, and enjoyed eternal fruition of his love, according to the text, “O thou soul which art at rest, return to thy Lord, pleased, and pleasing Him.” 6This is followed by a statement of the doctrine of the jurist Abu hanifa, to whose school the poet belonged, that weeping, even aloud, during prayer does not render the prayers void, provided that the weeping be caused by thoughts of the world to come, and not by thoughts of this present world. 7 And, apparently in allusion to the name Abu Hanifa, the poet recalls the text, “They followed the faith of Abraham, the orthodox” (Hanifun). 8 
NOTES: 
Koran iii. 22.2. Koran xcvi. 9.3. Koran xvi. 70.4. Koran ci. 5.5. Koran xv. 17. The sin of Iblis was his envy of Adam.6. Koran lxxxix. 277. Mishkat ul Masabih, i. , note.8. Koran iv. 124. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY VI. The Disciple who blindly imitated his Shaikh. 
An ignorant youth entered an assembly of pious persons who were being addressed by a holy Shaikh. He saw the Shaikh weeping copiously, and in mere blind and senseless imitation he copied the Shaikh’s behavior, and wept as copiously himself, though he understood not a word of the discourse. In fact, he behaved just like a deaf man who sees those around him laughing, and laughs himself out of compliment to them, though he knows not the subject of their merriment, and is obliged to have it explained to him before he can laugh again with real perception of the joke. After he had wept in this ignorant way for some time he made due obeisance to the Shaikh, and took his departure. But one of the Shaikh’s true disciples, being jealous for the honor of his master, followed him, and thus addressed him, “I adjure you by Allah that you go not and say, ‘I saw the Shaikh weeping, and I too wept like him.’ Your ignorant and mere imitative weeping is totally unlike the weeping of that holy saint. Such weeping as his is only possible to one who has, like him, waged the spiritual war for thirty years. His weeping is not caused by worldly grieves, but by the deep concerns of the spirit. You cannot perceive by reason or sense the spiritual mysteries that are open and plain to his enlightened vision, any more than the darkness can behold the light. His breathings are as those of ‘Isa, and not like mere human sighs raised by worldly sorrows. His tears and his smiles and his speeches are not his own, but proceed from Allah. Fools like you are ignorant of the motive and design of saints’ actions, and therefore only harm themselves if they try to imitate them, without understanding their meaning.” To illustrate this a curious story is told of a foolish lady who copied a trick of her clever slave-girl, without understanding the modus operandi, and by so doing caused her own death. In like manner parrots are taught to speak without understanding the words. The method is to place a mirror between the parrot and the trainer. The trainer, hidden by the mirror, utters the words, and the parrot, seeing his own reflection in the mirror, fancies another parrot is speaking, and imitates all that is said by the trainer behind the mirror. So God uses prophets and saints as mirrors whereby to instruct men, being Himself all the time hidden behind these mirrors, viz., the bodies of these saints and prophets; and men, when they hear the words proceeding from these mirrors, are utterly ignorant that they are really being spoken by “Universal Reason” or the “Word of God” behind the mirrors of the saints. 
The worthlessness of mere blind imitation (taqlid) of religious exercises.When a friend tells a joke to his friend,The deaf man who listens laughs twice over;The first time from imitation and foolishness,Because he sees all the party laughing;Yet, though he laughs like the others,He is then ignorant of the subject of their laughter;Then he inquires what the laughter was about,And, on hearing it, proceeds to laugh a second time.Wherefore the blind imitator is like a deaf man,In regard to the joy he feigns to feel.The light is the Shaikh’s, the fountain the Shaikh’s,And the outpouring of joy is also the Shaikh’s, not his.’Tis like water in a vessel, or light through a glass;If they think they come from themselves, they are wrong.When the vessel leaves the fountain, it sees its error;It sees the water in it comes from the fountain.The glass also learns, when the moon sets,That its light proceeded from the shining of the moon.When his eyes are opened by the command, “Arise!” 1Then that disciple smiles a second time, like the dawn.He laughs also at his own previous laughter,Which overtook him out of mere blind imitation.When he returns from his long and distant wanderingsHe says, “Lo! this was the truth, this the secret!With what blindness and misconception did I pretend.To experience joy in that distant valley?What a delusion I was under! what a mistake!My feeble wit conjured up vain imaginations.”How can an infant on the road know the thoughts of men?How far its fancies are removed from true knowledge!The thoughts of infants run on the nurse and milk,Or on raisins or nuts, or on crying and wailing.The blind imitator is like a feeble infant,Even though he possesses fine arguments and proofs.His preoccupation with obscure arguments and proofsDrags him away from insight into truth.His stock of lore, which is the salve of his eyes,Bears him off and plunges him in difficult questions.Ah! man of imitation, come out of Bokhara! 2And humble yourself in order to be exalted.Then you will, behold another Bokhara within you,Whereof the heroes ignore these questions of law.Though a footman may be swift of foot on land,Yet on the sea he is as one with ruptured tendons.That footman is only “carried by land,” 3But he who is “carried by sea” is the truly learned one.The King of kings showers special favors upon him;Know this, O man pledged to vain illusions!The mere legal theologian is impotent to behold the light of the Spirit.When the day dawns from heaven night flees away;What, then, can its darkness know of the nature of light?The gnat scuds away before the blast of the winds;What, then, knows the gnat of the savor of the winds?When the Eternal appears the transitory is annulled;What, then, knows he transitory of the Eternal?When He sets foot on the transitory He bewilders it;When it is become naught He sheds his light upon it, 4If you wish, you can adduce hundreds of precedents,But I take no heed of them, O man poor in spirit!The letters Lam, Mim, and Ha, Mim prefixed to some SurasResemble the staff of Moses, when fully understood. 5Ordinary letters resemble these ‘to outward view,But are far beneath them in signification.If an ordinary man ‘take a staff and try it,Will it prove like the staff of Moses in the test?This breath of ‘Isa is not like every ordinary breath,Which proceeds from mere human joy or sorrow.These Alif, Mim, Ha and Mim, O father,Proceed from the Lord of mankind.If you have sense, regard not in the same way as theseEvery ordinary Alif and Lam which resembles these;Although these sacred letters consist of common ones,And resemble common ones in their composition.Muhammad himself was formed of flesh and skin,Although no man is of the same genus as he.He had flesh and skin and bones,Although no man resembles him in composition;Because in his composition were contained divine powers,Whereby all human flesh was confounded.In like manner the composition of the letters Ha, MimIs far exalted above ordinary compounds of letters;Because from these mysterious compositions comes life,Even as utter confusion follows the last trump.That staff becomes a serpent and divides the Nile,Like the staff of Ha, Mim, by the grace of God.Its outward form resembles the outward forms of others,Yet the disk of a cake differs much from the moon’s disk.The saint’s weeping and laughter and speechAre not his own, but proceed from God.Whereas fools look only to outward appearances,These mysteries are totally hidden from them;Of necessity the real meaning is veiled from them,For the mystery is lost in the intervening medium. 
Then follows an anecdote of a man who heard whelps barking in their mother’s womb. A voice came from heaven and explained that these whelps were like the men who have not emerged into the light of truth, but are still veiled in spiritual darkness, and, though they make pretensions to spiritual sight, their discourses are useless, both to procure spiritual food for themselves, and to warn their hearers of spiritual dangers.Next comes an anecdote of a pious man of Zarwan, who made a point of giving to the poor four times the legal amount of alms due from his growing crops. Thus, instead of paying one-tenth on each crop, which is the legal amount enjoined by the Prophet, 6 he was wont to pay one-tenth of the green ears of corn, another tenth of the ripe wheat, a third tenth of the threshed grain, and a fourth of the bread made therefrom, and so on with grapes and other produce of hi garden. In recognition of his piety God blessed his garden and made it bear fruit abundantly. But his sons, who were blind to spiritual matters, saw only his lavish expenditure upon the poor, and could not see the divine blessing upon the garden, called down by his liberality, and rebuked him for his extravagance. There is no limit to the divine bounty, because God’s ability to bestow bounties, unlike human ability, is unbounded and infinite. 
NOTES: 
Koran lxxiv. 2. Dawn smiles first as “false dawn,” and the second time as “true dawn.”2. Alluding to Bokhari, the author of the “Sahih Bokhari,” the first and most esteemed collection of traditions.3. Koran xvii. 72. The man of “external knowledge” is “carried only by land,” but the mystic is led over sea as well.4. When reason is annihilated, the “Truth” is reflected in the resulting caput mortuum or Not-being, as in a mirror (Gulshan i Raz, I. 125).5. These letters were supposed to have mysterious meanings. See Rodwell, Koran, , note.6. Miskat ul Masabih, i. 417. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY VII. How Adam was created out of a handful of earth brought by an Angel. 
When the Almighty determined to create mankind to be proved by good and evil, He deputed the angel Gabriel to bring a handful of earth for the purpose of forming Adam’s body. Gabriel accordingly girded his loins and proceeded to the Earth to execute the divine commands. But the Earth, being apprehensive that the man so created would rebel against God and draw down God’s curse upon her, remonstrated with Gabriel, and besought him to forbear. She represented that Gabriel would at the last day be pre-eminent over all the eight angels who would then support the throne, 1 and that it therefore was only right that he should prefer mercy to judgment. At last Gabriel granted her prayer, and returned to heaven without taking the handful of earth. Then God deputed Michael on the same errand, and the Earth made similar excuses to him, and he also listened to her crying, and returned to heaven without taking a handful. He excused himself to the Almighty by citing the example of the people to whom the prophet Jonah was sent, who were delivered from the threatened penalty in consequence of their lamentation for their sins; 2 and the text, “If He please, He will deliver you from that which ye shall cry to Him to avert.” 3 Then God sent the angel Israfil on the same errand, and he also was diverted from the execution of it by a divine intimation. At last God sent ‘Izrail, the angel of death, who, being of sterner disposition than the others, resolutely shut his ears to the Earth’s entreaties, and brought back the required handful of earth. The Earth pressed him with the argument that God’s command to bear away a handful of her substance against her will did not override the other divine command to take pity on suppliants; but ‘Izrail would not listen to her, remarking that, according to the canons of theological interpretation, it was not allowable to have recourse to analogical reasoning to evade a plain and categorical injunction. He added, that in executing this injunction, painful though it might be, he was to be regarded only as a spear in the hand of the Almighty. The moral is, that when any of God’s creatures do us a harm, we ought to regard them only as instruments of God, who is the Only Real Agent. 
God the Only Real Agent.Do not, like fools, crave mercy from the spear,But from the King in whose hand the spear is held.Wherefore do you cry to spear and sword,Seeing they are captives in the hand of that Noble One?He is as Azar, maker of idols; I am only the idol;Whatever instrument He makes me, that I am.If He makes of me a cup, a cup am I;If He makes of me a dagger, a dagger am I.If He makes me a fountain, I pour forth water;If He makes me fire, I give forth heat.If He makes me rain, I produce rich crops;If He makes me a dart, I pierce bodies.If He makes me a snake, I dart forth poison;If He makes me a friend, I serve my friends.I am as the pen in the fingers of the writer,I am not in a position to obey or not at will. 
On the return of ‘Izrail to heaven with the handful of earth, God said he would make him the angel of death. ‘Izrail represented that this would make him very hateful to men; but God said ‘Izrail would operate by disease and sickness, and men would not look for any cause beyond these diseases, according to the text, “He is nearer to you than ye are; yet ye see Him not.” 4 Moreover, death is in reality a boon to the spiritual, and it is only fools who cry, “Would that this world might endure for ever, and that there were no such thing as death!” 
Death is gain, for “God will change their evil things into good things.” 5One said, “The world would be a pleasant placeIf death never set foot within it.”Another answered, “If there were no death,The complicated world would be worth not a jot.It would be a crop raised in a desert,Left neglected and never threshed out.Thou fanciest that to be death, which is life,Thou sowest thy seed in salt ground.Carnal reason deceives us; do thou contradict it,For that fool takes what is really death to be life.O God, show us all things in this house of deception,Show them all as they really are!” 6It is said in the Hadis that on the last dayThe command, “Arise,” will come to every single body.The blast of the last trump will be God’s commandTo every atom to lift its head from the earth.The souls, also, of each will return to their bodies,Even as sense returns to bodies awaking from sleep.On that morn each soul will recognize its own body,And return to its own ruin like hidden treasure.It will recognize its own body and enter it.The soul of the goldRumi will not enter the tailor;The soul of the wise will enter the body of the wise,The soul of the unjust the body of the unjust.In like manner as the souls will fly into their clay,So will the books fly into their right hands and left. 7God will place in their hands their books of greed and liberality,Of sin and piety, and whatever they have practiced.When they shall awake from sleep on that morning,All the evil and good they have done will recur to them.Every thought which has dwelt in them during lifeWill appear as a form visible to all, 8Like the thought of an architect realized in a house,Or the perfect plant issuing from the seed in the ground.From onion and saffron and poppyThe hand of spring will unfold the secret of winter.This one will be verdant and flourish, saying, “We are the pious;”That other will hang his head like the violet,With tears starting from his eyes through deadly fear;Yea, tens of founts of tears through terrible dread;With eyes wide opened in deadly apprehensionLest his book may be placed in his left hand.Then will the evildoer be sent to the fiery prison,For thorn can in no wise escape the flame.When his guardian angels behind and before,Who before were unseen, shall appear like patrols,They will hurry him off, pricking him with their spears,And saying, “O dog, begone to thy kennel!”Then the prisoner will cry, “O Lord, I am a hundred,Yea, a hundred times as wicked as Thou sayest.But in mercy Thou veilest my sins,Otherwise my vileness were known to Thy all-seeing eye.But, independently of my own works and warfare,Independently of my faith or unfaith, good or evil,Independently of my poor devotion to Thee,And of my thoughts and the thoughts of hundreds like me,I fix my hopes on Thy mercy alone.Whether Thou adjudge me upright or rebellious,I sue for free pardon from Thy unbought justice.O Lord, who art gracious without thought of consequence,I set my face towards that free grace of Thine;I have no regard to my own acts.I set my face towards this hope,Seeing that Thou gayest me my being first of all;Thou gayest me the garment of being unasked,Wherefore I firmly trust in Thy free grace.When he thus enumerates his sins and faults,God at last will grant him pardon as a free gift,Saying, “O angels, bring him back to me,Since the eyes of his heart were set on hope,Without care for consequences I set him free,And draw the pen through the record of his sins!” 
NOTES: 
Koran lxix. 17.2. Koran x. 98.3. Koran vi 41.4. Koran lvi. 84.5. Koran xxv. 70. The “final restitution” of all by free grace.6. Cp. the Hadis: “Inspiration is a light that shines in the heart, and shows the nature of all things as they really are.”7. See Koran lxix. 18.8. See the parallel passage in Guishan i Raz, 1. 690. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY VIII. Mahmud and Ayaz. 
1 Mahmud, the celebrated king of Ghazni, had a favorite named Ayaz, who was greatly envied by the other courtiers. One day they came to the king and informed him that Ayaz was in the habit of retiring to a secret chamber, and locking himself in, and that they suspected he had there concealed coin stolen from the treasury, or else wine and forbidden drink. The fact was, that Ayaz had placed in that chamber his old shoes and the ragged dress which he used to wear before the king had promoted him to honor, and used to retire there every day and wear them for a time, in order to remind himself of his lowly origin, and to prevent himself from being puffed up with pride. This he did in accordance with the text, “Let man reflect out of what he was created.” 2 The intoxication of the present life puffs up many with false pride, even as Iblis, who refused to worship Adam, saying, “Who is Adam, that he should be lord over me?” This he said because he was one of the Jinn, who are all created of fire. 3 Adam, on the other hand, confessed his own vileness, saying, “Thou hast formed me out of clay.” The king was well assured of the fidelity of Ayaz; but in order to confute those who suspected him, he ordered them to go by night and break open that chamber and bring away all the treasure and other things hidden in it. It is a characteristic of evildoers to think evil of the saints, because they judge of their conduct by the light of their own evil natures, as the crooked foot makes a crooked footprint, and as the spider sees things distorted through the web he has spun himself The hug’s conduct in this did not betoken any diminution of his love for Ayaz, because lover and beloved are always as ono soul, though they may be opposed to outward view. Accordingly the courtiers proceeded to the chamber of Ayaz at night, and broke open the door, and searched the floor and the walls, but found only the old shoes and the ragged dress. They then returned to the king discomfited and shamefaced, even as the wicked who have slandered the saints will be on the day of judgment, according to the text, “On the resurrection day thou shalt see those who have lied of God with their faces black.” 4 Then they besought the king to pardon their offence, but he refused, saying that their offence had been committed against Ayaz, and that he would leave it to Ayaz to decide whether they should be punished or pardoned. If Ayaz showed mercy it would be well; and if he punished it would be well also, for “the law of retaliation is the security for life.” 5 Only he enjoined him to pronounce his sentence without delay, because “Waiting is punishment.” 
A description of genuine union with God.A loved one said to her lover to try him,Early one morning, “O such an one, son of such an one,I marvel whether you hold me more dear,Or yourself; tell me truly, O ardent suitor!”He answered, “I am so entirely absorbed in you,That I am full of you from head to foot.Of my own existence nothing but the name remainsIn my being is nothing besides you, O Object of desire!Therefore am I thus lost in you,Just as vinegar is absorbed in honey;Or as a stone, which is changed into a pure ruby,Is filled with the bright light of the sun.In that stone its own properties abide notIt is filled with the sun’s properties altogether;So that, if afterwards it holds itself dear’Tis the same as holding the sun dear, O beloved!And if it hold the sun dear in its heart,’Tis clearly the same as holding itself dear.Whether that pure ruby hold itself dear,Or hold the sun dear,There is no difference between the two preterences;On either hand is naught but the light of dawn.But till that stone becomes a ruby it hates itselfFor till it becomes one ‘I,’ it is two separate ‘I’s,’For ’tis then darkened and purblind,And darkness is the essential enemy of light.If it then hold itself dear, it is an infidel;Because that self is an opponent of the mighty Sun.Wherefore ’tis unlawful for the stone then to say ‘I,Because it is entirely in darkness and nothingness.”Pharaoh said, “I am the Truth,” and was laid low.Mansur Hallaj said, “I am the Truth,” and escaped free.’ 6Pharaoh’s “I” was followed by the curse of God;Mansur’s “I” was followed by the mercy of God, O beloved!Because Pharaoh was a stone, Mansur a ruby;Pharaoh an enemy of light, Mansur a friend.O prattler, Mansur’s “I am He” was a deep mystic saying,Expressing union with the light, not mere incarnation. 7 
NOTES: 
All the latter part of this story is a parable of the last judgement.2. Koran lxxxvi. 5.3. Koran xviii. 48, and lv. 14.4. Koran xxxix. 61.5. Koran ii. 17.6. See Guishan i Raz, Answer vii. . Mansur Hallaj (woolcarder), the celebrated Sufi who was put to death at Baghdad in 309 (A.H.)7. See Guishan i Raz, i. 454, and note. The doctrine of the descent of the Deity into man (Halul), or incarnation, is rejected both by Rumi and Shabistari in favor of the doctrine of intimate union (Ittihad or Wahdat). 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY IX. The sincere repentance of Nasuh. 
Ayaz, in weighing the pros and cons in regard to pardoning the courtiers, remarks that professions of faith and penitence when contradicted by acts are worthless, according to the text, “If ye ask them who hath created the heavens and the earth, they will say ‘God;’ yet they devise lies.” 1 And in illustration of this he tells a story of a faithless husband who retired to a secret chamber ostensibly to say his prayers, but really to carry on an intrigue with a slave-girl, and the falsity of whose pretences was demonstrated by ocular proof of his condition. In like manner, on the day of resurrection man’s hands and eyes and feet will bear witness against him of the evil actions done by him, thus confuting his pretences to piety. The test of a sincere repentance is abhorrence of past sins and utter abandonment of all pleasure in them, the old love for sin being superseded by the new love for holiness. Such a repentance was that of Nasuh. Nasuh in his youth disguised himself in female attire and obtained employment as attendant at the women’s baths, where he used to carry on shameful intrigues with some of the women who frequented the bath. At last, however, his eyes were opened to the wickedness of his conduct, and be went to a holy man and besought him to pray for him. The holy man, imitating the long-suffering of the “Veiler of sins” did not so much as name his sin, but prayed, saying, “God give thee repentance of the sin thou knowest!” The prayer of that holy man was accepted, because the prayers of such an one are the same as God’s own will, according to the tradition, “My servant draws nigh to me by pious works till I love him; and when I love him I am his ear, his eye, his tongue, his foot, his hand; and by me he hears, sees, talks, walks, and feels. “Nasuh then returned to the bath a truly repentant man; but soon afterwards one of the women frequenting the bath lost a valuable jewel, and the king gave order that all persons connected with the bath should be stripped and searched. When the officers came to the bath to execute this order Nasuh was overwhelmed with fear, for he knew that if his sex were discovered he would certainly be put to death. In his fear he called upon God for deliverance, and swooned with fear and became beside himself, so that his natural self was annihilated, and he became a new creature, even as a corpse rising from the grave. When he came to himself he found that the lost jewel had been found, and those who had suspected him came and begged his pardon. Shortly afterwards the king’s daughter sent for him to come and wash her head; but, in spite of her imperative commands, he refused to place himself again in the way of temptation, lest he might fall again, and God might “make easy to him the path to destruction.” 2Man’s members will bear witness against him on the day of judgement, and confute his claims to piety.On the resurrection day all secrets will be disclosed;Yea, every guilty one will be convicted by himself.Hand and foot will bear testimony openlyBefore the Almighty concerning their owner’s sins.Hand will say, “I stole such and such things;”Lip will say, “I asked for such and such things.”Foot will say, “I went after my own desires;”Arm will say, “I embraced the harlot.”Eye will say, “I looked after forbidden things;”Ear will say, “I listened to evil talk.”Thus the man will be shown to be a liar from head to foot,Since his own members will prove him to be a liar. 
NOTES: 
Koran xxix. 61.2. Koran xcii. 10. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY X. The Lion, the Fox, and the Ass. 
As an instance of false and insincere repentance, a story is next told, which is also found in the fifth chapter of the Anwar i Suhaili. A lion had been wounded in fight with a male elephant, and was unable to hunt game for himself. In this strait he called a fox who was wont to attend upon him, and to live on the meat that was left from his repasts, just as disciples attending on a saint subsist on the heavenly food dropping from his lips. He called this fox, and bade him go and entice some animal to come near his lair, so that he might kill it and make a meal of it. The fox went and searched the neighborhood, and at last found a lean and hungry ass who was grazing in a stony place where there was little or no grass. The fox, after making due salutations, condoled with the ass on his unfortunate condition; but the ass replied that it was his divinely appointed lot, and that it would be impious to complain of the dispensations of Providence. He also instanced the case of the ass of a water-carrier, which, after having starved and worked hard in its master’s service, by chance found admittance to the king’s stables, where it was struck by the sleek appearance of the horses. But one day the horses were taken out to battle, and returned in a most miserable plight, some grievously wounded, and others dying. After seeing this sight it determined that its own hard life was preferable, and returned to its master. The fox replied that the ass was wrong in carrying passive resignation to such an extent as to refuse to try to better his condition when the opportunity of doing so presented itself, because God says, “Go in quest of the bounties of God.” 1 He added, if the ass would come with him, he would take him to a delightful meadow, where he would never lack plenty of grass all the year round. The ass rejoined that the command to strive for sustenance was only issued on account of the weakness of man’s faith. The fox replied that this exalted faith was only vouchsafed to a few great saints, because the Prophet describes contentment as a treasure, and treasure is not found by everyone. The ass rejoined that the fox was perverting the Scripture, as no pious man who trusted in God was ever forsaken. In illustration of this he told an anecdote of a devotee who determined to put the matter to the test, and went out into the desert, trusting only to God to supply his wants, and resolved to seek no aid of man, and not to exert himself in any way to gain food. He lay down on a stone and went to sleep; and God sent a caravan of travelers that way, who found him, and forced him to take food in spite of himself. The fox again pressed the ass to try to better his condition, saying that God had given men hands to use and not to do anything with. The ass answered that he knew of no occupation and exertion better than trust in God, as worldly occupations often lead to ruin, according to the text, “Throw not yourselves with your own hands into ruin.” 2 But though the ass repeated all these excellent precepts, yet it was only so much cant on his part, because he was not firmly rooted in. the faith. He had all the time a carnal hankering after the pleasant grazing-ground the fox told him of, and the objections he made were only a parrot-like repetition of precepts heard, but not thoroughly understood and taken to heart. To illustrate the worthless nature of mere imitated religion and profession divorced from practice, a story is told of an infamous fellow who used to carry a dagger to protect as he said, his honor, though his every action showed that he had neither honor to protect nor manliness to protect it. The ass, though like Abraham, he had broken his idols, had not a sufficiently rooted faith to leap, like Abraham, into the fire, and thus prove his faith. [Here the poet apologizes for the trivial illustrations he uses by citing the text, “Verily God is not ashamed to set forth as well the instance of a gnat as of any nobler object” 3.] Finally the ass yielded to the fox’s enticement, and accompanied him to the lion’s lair. The lion, being famished with hunger, sprang upon him the moment he appeared. Being, however, weak with sickness and fasting, he missed his aim, and the ass escaped with a slight wound. Then the fox blamed the lion for his precipitation, and the lion, after excusing himself as best he could, persuaded the fox to try to allure the ass a second time into his lair. The fox consented to try, observing that experience would probably have been thrown away on an ass, and his vows of repentance forgotten. Those who lapse from repentance, in forgetfulness of their former experience, may be compared to the Jews changed into apes and swine by ‘Isa. 4 The fox was received by the ass with many reproaches for having deceived him; but he at last managed to persuade the ass that what he had seen was not a real lion, but only a harmless talisman; and the silly ass allowed himself to be again deluded, and forgot his vows of repentance, and again followed the fox to the lion’s lair, where he speedily met his doom. 
Men who make professions of holiness merely from blind imitation of others are detected and confuted by the opposition between their words and their deeds.A man asked a camel, saying, “Ho! whence comest thou,Thou beast of auspicious footstep?”He replied, “ From the hot bath of thy street.”The man said, “ That is proved false by thy dirty legs!”So, when stubborn Pharaoh saw Moses’ staff a serpent,And begged for a delay (to fetch magicians) 5 and relented,Wise men said, “He ought to have become harsher,If He really be, as He says, the Lord Supreme. 6What could miracles such as these of serpents,Or even dragons, matter to the majesty of His divinity?If He be really Lord Supreme, seated on His throne,What need has He to wheedle a worm like Moses?”O babbler, while thy soul is drunk with mere date wine,Thy spirit hath not tasted the genuine grapes.For the token of thy having seen that divine lightIs this, to withdraw thyself from the house of pride.When a fowl flies to the salt water,It has never beheld the blessing of sweet water;But its faith is mere imitation of other fowl,And its soul has never seen the face of real faith.Wherefore the blind imitator encounters great perils,Perils of the road, of robbers, of cursed Satans.But when he has seen the light of God, he is safeFrom the agitation of doubt, and is firm in the faith.Till the foam has landed on the shore and dry land,Which is its home, it is ever tossed to and fro.’Tis at home on the land, but a stranger on the water.While it remains a stranger, it must be tossed about.When its eyes are opened, and it sees the vision of land,Satan has no longer any domination over it.Although the ass repeated verities to the fox,He spoke them idly and in the way of cant.He praised the water, but was not eager to drink;He rent his garments and his hair, but was no real lover.The excuse of a hypocrite is rejected, not approved,Because it comes only from the lips, not from the heart.He has the scent of the apple, but not a piece of it,And the scent only for the purpose of misleading others.Thus a woman’s onset in the midst of a battle array,She keeps in line, and forms part of the battle array,Yet, though she looks a very lion as she stands in line,Her hand begins to tremble as soon as she takes a sword.Woe to him whose reason is like a womanWhile his lust is like a resolute man!Of a certainty his reason will be worsted in the fight,And his imitation of a man will only lead him to ruin.Happy is he whose reason is masculine,And his ugly lust feminine and under subjection!Though the mere imitator quotes a hundred proofs,They are all based on opinion, not on conviction.He is only scented with musk, he is not himself musk;He smells of musk, but is really naught but dung.For his dung to become musk, O disciple,He must graze year after year in the divine pasture.For he who, like the musk-deer, feeds on saffron of KhotenMust not eat grass and oats like asses.That man of cant has at his tongue’s endA hundred proofs and precepts, but there is no life in him.When the preacher has himself no light or life,How can his words yield leaves and fruit?He impudently preaches to others to walk aright,While himself He is unsteady as a reed shaken by wind.Thus, though his preaching is very eloquent,It hides within it unsteadiness in the faith.In order to gain true wisdom man must shake off worldly illusions.The fox said, “In my pure wine there are no dregs;These vain suspicions are not becoming.All this is only baseless suspicion, O simple one,Else you would know I am not plotting against you.You repudiate me on account of your own bad fancies;Why do you thus suspect your true friends?Think well of the ‘Brothers of purity,’ 7Even though they show harshness toward you;For when evil suspicion takes hold of you,It severs you from hundreds of friends.If a tender friend treats you roughly to try you,’Tis contrary to reason to distrust him.Though I bear a bad name, my nature is not malevolent;What you saw was not dangerous, it was only a talisman.But even if there were danger in that object of suspicion,Friends always pardon an offence.”This world of illusions, fancies, desires, and fears,Is a mighty obstacle in the traveler’s path.Thus, when these forms of delusive imaginationsMisled Abraham, who was a very mountain of wisdom,He said of the star, “ This is my Lord,” 8Having fallen into the midst of the world of illusion.He thus interpreted the meaning of sun and stars,Yea, he, that great man who threaded jewels of interpretation,Seeing then that this world of eye-fascinating illusionSeduced from the right path such a mountain as Abraham,So that he said of the star, “This is my Lord,”What will not its illusions effect on a stupid ass?Human reason is drowned, like the high mountains,in the flood of illusion and vain imaginations.The very mountains are overwhelmed by this flood,Where is safety to be found save in Noah’s ark?By illusions that plunder the road of faithThe faithful have been split into seventy-two sects.But the man of conviction escapes illusion;He does not mistake his eyelash for the new moon.He who is divorced from ‘Omar’s lightIs deceived by his own crooked eyelash. 9Thousands of ships, in all their majesty and pomp,Have gone to pieces in this sea of illusion. 
Then follows an anecdote of Shaikh Muhammad of Ghazni, who was named “Sar i Razi,” because he used to take only a vine-leaf to break his fast. He dwelt a long time in the desert, and was there miraculously preserved from death, and directed by divine intimation to proceed to Ghazni, and beg money of the rich and distribute it to the poor. After he had done this some time a second intimation came to him to beg no longer, as the money for his charities would be supplied to him miraculously. He at last attained to such a degree of spiritual insight that he knew the wants of those who came to him for aid before they uttered them. He said the reason of this preternatural discernment was, that he had purified his heart of all but the love of God, and thus, whenever thoughts of anything besides God occurred to his mind, he knew they did not appertain to him, but must have been in some way suggested to him by the person asking aid of him. 
Then follow some reflections on the power of fasting and abstinence to subdue the carnal lusts which lead man to destruction; and two short anecdotes to illustrate the thesis that God never fails to provide sustenance for those who take no thought for the morrow, but place absolute trust in Him.The fate of the ass then suggests to the poet another train of reflections. After the lion had slain the ass, he went to the river to quench his thirst, telling the fox to watch the dead body till he returned; but the moment the lion’s back was turned the fox ate up the heart and liver, which are the daintiest parts. When the lion returned and inquired for them, the fox assured him that the ass had possessed neither a heart nor a liver, for if he had he would never have shown himself so stupid. Men without understanding are not really men at all, but only simulacra or forms of men. For lack of understanding many will cry in the world to come, “Had we but hearkened or understood, we had not been among the dwellers in the flame” 10 Then follows a story of a monk (Diogenes) who took a lantern and searched all through a bazaar crowded with men to find, as he said, a man.The monk’s search for a man.The monk said, “I am searching everywhere for a manWho lives by the life of the breath of God.”The other said, “Here are men; the bazaar is full;These are surely men, O enlightened sage!”The monk said, “I seek a man who walks straightAs well in the road of anger as in that of lust.Where is one who shows himself a man in anger and lust?In search of such a one I run from street to street.If there be one who is a true man in these two states,I will yield up my life for him this day!”The other, who was a fatalist, said, “What you seek is rare.But you are ignorant of the force of the divine decree;You see the branches, but ignore the root.We men are but branches, God’s eternal decree the root.That decree turns from its course the revolving sky,And makes foolish hundreds of planets like Mercury.It reduces to helplessness the world of devices;It turns steel and stone to water.O you who attribute stability to these steps on the road,You are one of the raw ones; yea, raw, raw!When you have seen the millstone turning round,Then, prithee, go and see the stream that turns it.When you have seen the dust rising up into the air,Go and mark the air in the midst of the dust.You see the kettles of thought boiling over,Look with intelligence at the fire beneath them.God said to Job, ‘Out of my clemencyI have given a grain of patience to every hair of thine.’Look not, then, so much at your own patience;After seeing patience, look to the Giver of patience.How long will you confine your view to the waterwheel?Lift up your head and view also the water.” 
NOTES: 
Koran lxii. 10.2. Koran ii. 191.3. Koran ii. 24.4. Koran v. 65.5. Koran xx. 25.6. Koran xxviii. 38.7. A society at Basra, who wrote, about 980 AD., an encyc1opedia of philosophy (trans. by Dieterici).8. Koran vi. 76.9. Alluding to the first anecdote in Book II.10. Koran lxxvii. 10. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY XI. The Mosalman who tried to convert a Magian. 
A Mosalman pressed a Magian to embrace the true faith. The Magian replied, “If God wills it, no doubt I shall do so.” 1 The Mosalman replied, “God certainly wills it, that your soul may be saved from hell; but your own evil lusts and the Devil hold you back.” The Magian retorted, using the arguments of the Jabriyan or “Compulsionists,” that on earth God is sole sovereign, and that Satan and lust exist and act only in furtherance of God’s will. To hold that God is pulling men one way and Satan another is to derogate from God’s sovereignty. Man cannot help moving in the direction he is most strongly impelled to go; if he is impelled wrongly he is no more to blame than a building designed for a mosque but degraded into a fire-temple, or a piece of cloth designed for a coat but altered into a pair of trousers. The truth is, that whatever occurs is according to God’s will, and Satan himself is only one of His agents. Satan resembles the Turkoman’s dog who sits at the door of the tent, and is” vehement against aliens, but full of tenderness to friends.” 2 The Mosalman then replied with the arguments of the Qadarians and Mutazilites, to prove the freedom of the will and consequent responsibility of man for his actions. He urged that man’s free agency and consequent responsibility are recognized in common parlance, as when we order a man to act in a certain way,-that God expressly assumes man to be a free agent by addressing commands and prohibitions to him, and by specially exempting some, such as the blind, 3 from responsibility for certain acts, that our internal consciousness assures us of our power of choice, just as outward sense assures us of properties in material objects, and that it is just as sophistical to disbelieve the declarations of the interior consciousness, as those of the outward senses as to the reality of the material world. He then told an anecdote of a man caught robbing a garden and defending himself with the fatalist plea of irresponsibility, to whom the owner of the garden replied by administering a very severe beating, and assuring him that this beating was also predestined, and that he therefore could not help administering it. He concluded his argument by repeating that the traditions, “Whatever God wills is,” and “The pen is dry, and alters not its writing,” are not inconsistent with the existence of freewill in man. They are not intended to reduce good action and evil to the same level, but good actions will always entail good consequences, and bad actions the reverse. A devotee admired the splendid apparel of the slaves of the Chief of Herat, and cried to Heaven, “Ah! learn from this Chief how to treat faithful slaves!” Shortly after the Chief was deposed, and his slaves were put to the torture to make them reveal where the Chief had hidden his treasure, but not one would betray the secret. Then a voice from heaven came to the devotee, saying, “Learn from them how to be a faithful slave, and then look for recompense.” The Magian, unconvinced by the arguments of the Mosalman, again plied him with “Compulsionist” arguments, and the discussion was protracted, with the usual result of leaving both the disputants of the same opinion as when they began. The poet remarks that the contest of the “Compulsionists” and the advocates of man’s free agency will endure till the day of judgment; for nothing can resolve these difficulties 4 but the true love which is “a gift imparted by God to whom He will.” 5 
Love puts reason to silence.Love is a perfect muzzle of evil suggestions;Without love who ever succeeded in stopping them?Be a lover, and seek that fair Beauty,Hunt for that Waterfowl in every stream!How can you get water from that which cuts it off?How gain understanding from what destroys understanding?Apart from principles of reason are other principlesOf light and great price to be gained by love of God.Besides this reason of yours God has other reasonsWhich will procure for you heavenly nourishment.By your carnal reason you may procure earthly food,By God-given reason you may mount the heavens.When, to win enduring love of God, you sacrifice reason,God gives you “a tenfold recompense;” 6 yea, seven hundred fold.When those Egyptian women sacrificed their reason, 7They penetrated the mansion of Joseph’s love;The Cup-bearer of life bore away their reason,They were filled with wisdom of the world without end.Joseph’s beauty was only an offshoot of God’s beauty;Be lost, then, in God’s beauty more than those women.Love of God cuts short reasoning, O beloved,For it is a present refuge from perplexities.Through love bewilderment befalls the power of speech,It no longer dares to utter what passes;For if it sets forth an answer, it fears greatlyThat its secret treasure may escape its lips.Therefore it closes lips from saying good or bad,So that its treasure may not escape it.In like manner the Prophet’s companions tell us“When the Prophet used to tell us deep sayings,That chosen one, while scattering pearls of speech,Would bid us preserve perfect quiet and silence.”So, when the mighty phoenix hovers over your head, 8Causing your soul to tremble at the motion of its wings,You venture not to stir from your place,Lest that bird of good fortune should take wing.You hold your breath and repress your coughs,So as not to scare that phoenix into flying away.And if one say a word to you, whether good or bad,You place finger on lip, as much as to say, “Be silent.”That phoenix is bewilderment, 9 it makes you silent;The kettle is silent, though it is boiling all the while. 
NOTES: 
Note the true believer is here represented as using the arguments of the Qadarians or Mutazilites for free will, as against the Jabriyan or fatalist argument put into the mouth of the Magian.2. Koran xlviii. 29.3. Koran xxiv. 60.4. The Prophet said, “Sit not with a disputer about fate, nor converse with him.”5. Koran iii. 66.6. Koran vi. 161.7. “And when they saw him they were amazed at him, and cut their hands” (Koran xii. 31).8. It is supposed to bring good fortune.9. Bewilderment is the “truly mystical darkness of ignorance” which falls upon the mystic when the light of absolute Being draws near to him, and “blinds him with excess of light.” See Gulshan i Raz, , and notes. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY XII. The Devotee who broke the noble’s wine-jar. 
A certain noble, who lived under the Christian dispensation when wine was allowed, sent his servant to a monastery to fetch some wine. The servant went and bought the wine, and was returning with it, when he passed the house of a very austere and testy devotee. This devotee called out to him, “What have you got there?” The servant said, “Wine, belonging to such a noble.” The devotee said, “What! does a follower of God indulge in wine? Followers of God should have naught to do with pleasure and drinking; for wine is a very Satan, and steals men’s wits. Your wits are not too bright already, so you have no need to render them still duller by drink.” In illustration of this, he told the story of one Ziayi Dalaq, a very tall man, who had a dwarfish brother. This brother one day received him very ungraciously, only half rising from his seat in answer to his salutation, and Ziayi Dalaq said to him, “You seem to think yourself so tall that it is necessary to clip off somewhat of your height.” Finally the devotee broke the wine-jar with a stone, and the servant went and told his master. The noble was very wrathful at the presumption of the devotee in taking upon himself to prohibit wine, as condemned by the law of nature, when it had not been prohibited by the Gospel, and he took a thick stick and went to the devotee’s house to chastise him. The devotee heard of his approach and hid himself under some wool, which belonged to the ropemakers of the village, He said to himself, “To tell an angry man of his faults one needs to have a face as hard as a mirror, which reflects his ugliness without fear or favor.” Just so the Prince of Tirmid was once playing chess with a courtier, and being checkmated, got into a rage and threw the chessboard at his courtier’s head. So before playing the next game the courtier protected his head by wrappings of felt. Then the neighbors of the devotee, hearing the noise, came out and interceded for him with the noble, telling him that the devotee was half-witted, and could not be held responsible for his actions; and moreover, that as he was a favorite of God, 1 it was useless to attempt to slay him before his time, for the Prophet and other saints had been miraculously preserved in circumstances fatal to ordinary persons. The noble refused to be pacified; but the neighbors redoubled their entreaties, urging that he had so much pleasure in his sovereignty that he could well dispense with the pleasure of wine. The noble strenuously denied this, saying that no other pleasure of sovereignty, or what not, could compensate him for the loss of wine, which made him sway from side to side like the jessamine. The prophets themselves had rejected all other pleasures for that of spiritual intoxication, and he who has once embraced a living mistress will never put up with a dead one. The moral is, that spiritual pleasures, typified by wine, are not to be bartered away for earthly pleasures. The Prophet said, “The world is carrion, and they who seek it are dogs;” and the Koran says, “The present life is no other than a pastime and a sport; but the future mansion is life indeed.” 2 
Description of a devotee who trusted to the light of nature.His brain is dried up; and as for his reason,It is now less than that of a child.Age and abstinence have added infirmity to infirmity,And his abstinence has yielded him no rejoicing.He has endured toils, but gained no reward from his Friend;He has done the work, but has not been paid.Either his work has lacked value,Or the time of recompense is not decreed as yet.Either his works are as the works of the Jews, 3Or his reward is held back till the appointed time.This grief and sorrow are enough for him,That in this valley of pain he is utterly friendless.With sad eyes he sits in his corner,With frowning face and downcast looks.There is no oculist who cares to open his eyes, 4Nor has he reason enough to discover the eye-salve.He strives earnestly with firm resolve and in hope,His work is done on the chance of being right.The vision of “The Friend” is far from his course,For he loses the kernel in his love for the shell. 
NOTES: 
Half-witted persons are supposed to be divinely protected.2. Koran xxix. 64.3. “But as to the infidels, their works are like the mirage in the desert” (Koran xxiv. 39).4. I.e., he has no director (Murshid i kamil) to instruct him in the right course. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY XIII. (continued). Mahmud and Ayaz. 
The poet now returns to the story of Mahmud and Ayaz, which is continued at intervals till the end of the book. The king inquired of Ayaz what made him continually visit his old shoes and garments, as Majnun used to visit his Laila, or as a Christian regularly visits his priest to obtain absolution for his sins. Why should he call to these dead things, like a fond mother calling to her dead infant, were it not that faith and love made them, as it were, living beings to him? The eye sees what it brings with it to see; it can see nothing but what it has gained the faculty of seeing. Thus the face of Laila, which seemed so lovely to the eyes of Majnun, made clairvoyant by love, seemed to strangers to have no claims to beauty. The earthly forms which here surround us are, as it were, vessels fraught with spiritual wine, only visible to those who have learnt to discern the deep things of the Spirit. 
Love and faith are a mighty spell.O Ayaz, what is this love of yours for your old shoes,Which resembles the love of a lover for his mistress?You have made these old shoes your object of devotion,Just as Majnun made an idol of his Laila!You have bound the affection of your soul to them,And hung them up in your secret chamber.How long will you say orisons to this old pair of shoes?And breathe your oft-told secrets into inanimate ears?Like the Arab lover to the house of his dead mistress,You address to them long invocations of love.Of what great Asaf were your shoes the house?Is your old garment, think you, the coat of Yusuf?Like a Christian who confesses to a priestHis past year’s sins of fornication, fraud, and deceit;In order that the priest may absolve him of those sins;He thinks the priest’s absolution the same as God’s!That priest is unable to condemn or to absolve;But faith and love are a mighty enchantment!God’s dealings visible to the spiritual.The wine is from that world, the vessels from this;The vessels are seen, but the wine is hidden!Hidden indeed from the sight of the carnal,But open and manifest to the spiritual!O God, our eyes are blinded!O pardon us, our sins are a heavy burden!Thou art hidden from us, though the heavens are filledWith Thy light, which is brighter than sun and moon!Thou art hidden, yet revealest our hidden secrets!Thou art the source that causes our rivers to flow.Thou art hidden in Thy essence, but seen by Thy bounties.Thou art like the water, and we like the millstone.Thou art like the wind, and we like the dust;The wind is unseen, but the dust is seen by all.Thou art the spring, and we the sweet green garden;Spring is not seen, though its gifts are seen.Thou art as the soul, we as hand and foot;Soul instructs hand and foot to hold and take.Thou art as reason, we like the tongue;’Tis reason that teaches the tongue to speak.Thou art as joy, and we are laughing;The laughter is the consequence of the joy.Our every motion every moment testifies,For it proves the presence of the Everlasting God.So the revolution of the millstone, so violent,Testifies to the existence of a stream of water.O Thou who art above our conceptions and descriptions,Dust be on our heads, and upon our similitudes of Thee!Yet Thy slaves never cease devising images of Thee;They cry to Thee always, “My life is Thy footstool!”Like that shepherd who cried,” O Lord! 1Come nigh to thy faithful shepherd,That he may cleanse thy garment of vermin,And mend thy shoes, and kiss the hem of thy robe!”No one equaled that shepherd in love and devotion,Though his manner of expressing it was most faulty.His love pitched its tent on the heavens,He himself was as the dog at the tent-door.When the sea of love to God boiled up,It touched his heart, but it touches your ears only. 
The thesis that silence may indicate emotions too deep for expression, while eloquent expressions may indicate that the ears only, and not the heart, have been touched, is next illustrated by a ludicrous anecdote of a dwarf who disguised himself as a woman, and presented himself at a sermon addressed to women. This dwarf played a trick on a woman sitting next him, which made her cry out, and the preacher fancied that his sermon had touched her heart; but the dwarf said that if her heart had been touched she would not have betrayed her feelings by publishing them to the whole congregation. 
The king then again pressed Ayaz to explain the mystery of his regard for the old shoes and rags, in order to admonish the courtiers, for he said that the beauty of true holiness is such that it attracts even infidels. To illustrate this he told an anecdote of a Mosalman who tried to convert a Gueber in the time of Bayazid. The Gueber said that he admired and envied the faith of Bayazid, though he had no power to imitate it; but as for the faith of the missionary who was trying to convert him, it only inspired him with aversion, because it was plainly insincere and hypocritical. And he told an anecdote of a harsh-voiced Mu’azzin who went into a heathen country and there uttered the call to prayer. It happened that there was a girl in that place who had long been inclined to embrace Islam, much to the grief of her parents; but when she heard this harsh call she was at once cured of her wish to forsake her own religion. Her father was so delighted at this that he ran out and loaded the Mu’azzin with gifts. The Gueber said the missionary had cured him of the wish to embrace Islam, just as the girl was cured by the Mu’azzin’s harsh voice. But he said he still retained his reverence for the faith of Bayazid, though he failed to understand how so much spirituality as was seen in Bayazid could be contained in an earthly body. He gave a curious illustration of his meaning. A man brought home a piece of meat weighing over half a man, to provide a meal for a guest; but his wife, who was very greedy, ate it all up secretly. When the man missed his meat he asked his wife for it, and she said the cat had eaten it. The man took the cat and weighed her, and found she weighed only half a man. Then he said to his wife, “If this half-man is all cat, where is the meat? and if it is meat, where is the cat?” The Gueber said this was exactly the difficulty he felt about the spirit and the body of Bayazid. He concluded by saying, in the words of the Hadis, “The true believer is attached to others, and others are attached to him, but the hypocrite inspires affection in no one.Mahmud and Ayaz. (continued).Mahmud again presses Ayaz to reveal his secrets, remarking that even if they suggest sad thoughts, they will benefit the hearers. The wise man is as a guest-house, and he admits all the thoughts that occur to him, whether of joy or of sorrow, with the same welcome, knowing that, like Abraham, he may entertain angels unawares. This is illustrated by the story of a woman who drove away a valued guest by a petulant remark, which he was not intended to hear, and afterwards repented her discourtesy so deeply that she put on mourning and turned her house into an inn. Let grief as well as joy lodge in the heart, for grief is sent for our benefit as well as joy. Endure woe patiently, like Joseph and Job, and regard it as a blessing, saying with Solomon, “Stir me up, O Lord, to be thankful for Thy favor which Thou hast showed upon me!” 2 Mahmud then praises Ayaz for being a true man who can control both lust and anger. Those who are carried away by anger or lust, like the girl of whom an anecdote is told, do not deserve the name of men. When anger or lust takes hold of a man reason departs from him. Then comes an anecdote of a cowardly Sufi who boasted of his bravery, but had not courage enough even to slay a captive infidel. Verily, the “greater warfare,” viz., that against one’s own lusts and passions, demands as much courage as the “lesser warfare” against the infidels. This is illustrated by a story of a saint named Iyazi, who, after having been a great warrior against the infidels, renounced the world and applied himself to wage the “greater warfare” against his own lusts. One day, while sitting in his cell, he heard the noise of the army going out to fight, and his carnal passion urged him to go and join in the fight, but he thus rebuked it: 
Iyazi’s rebuke to his passion, whish lusted to join in the “lesser warfare”.I said, “O foul and faithless passion,Whence have you derived this inclination to war?Tell me truly, O passion, is this your trickery?Or else is it stubbornness shunning obedience to God?If you say not truly I will attack you,And will afflict you more severely with discipline.”Passion then heaved a cry from its breast,And without mouth vented the following complaints:“In this cell you slay me every day;You slay my life like the life of a Gueber.Not a soul is aware of my condition;You drag me along without food or sleep.In the fight with one wound I shall quit the body,And the people will admire my valor and self-devotion.”I said, “O bad passion, you live as an infidel,And as an infidel you will die; shame be upon you!In both worlds you are naught but a hypocrite;In the two worlds only an unprofitable servant.I have vowed to God never to quit this cellWhile life remains in this body;Because whatever the body does in this privacyIs not done to make a fair show before men.Its movements and its rest in the privacy of this cellAre not intended for the sight of any besides God.This is the ‘greater warfare,’ that the ‘lesser;’Both these warfares have their Rustams and Haidars.They are not to be fought by one whose reason and senseFlee away as soon as a mouse wags its tail.Such persons must shun the array of battle,And keep aloof from it even as women do.” 
This is followed by an anecdote of another brave warrior who “was among the faithful, and made good what he had promised to God.” 3 Then comes a long story of a prince of Egypt who saw the portrait of a damsel belonging to the Chief of Mausil, and conceived an ardent passion for her, and sent an army to take her by force. The army succeeded in capturing her, and set out on the return march; but on the way the captain of the army fell in love with the damsel, and she returned his affection. When they reached Egypt she was made over to the prince, but at once took a dislike to him, as he was not nearly so manly as her beloved captain. The prince discovered her secret, and though he might justly have resented the treachery of the captain, he refrained, and showed true manliness in the “greater warfare” by pardoning his fault and uniting him with the damsel to whom he was so much attached. 
Ideas gained from hearing a thing lead to seeing it.A person put this question to a philosopher,“O sage, what is true and what is false?”The sage touched his ear and said, “This is false,But the eye is true and its report is certain.”The ear is false in relation to the eye,And most assertions are related to the ear. 4If a bat turn away its eyes from the sun,Still it is not veiled from some idea of the sun;Its very dread of the sun frames an idea of the sun,And that idea scares it away to the darkness.That idea of light terrifies it,And makes it cling to the murky night.Just so ’tis your idea of your terrible foeWhich makes you cling to your friends and allies.O Moses, thy revelations shed glory on the mount,But that frightened one endured not thy realities. 5Be not too proud, but know that you must first endureThe idea of the Truth, and thence come to the reality.No one is frightened by the mere idea of fighting,For “no courage is needed before fighting begins.” 6In the mere idea of fighting a coward can imagineHimself as attacking and retreating like Rustam.The pictures of Rustam on the wall of a bathAre similar to a coward’s ideas of fighting.But when these ideas are tested by actual sight,What of the coward then? His bravery is gone!Strive, then, from mere hearing to press on to seeing; 7What ear has told you falsely eye will tell truly.Then ear too will acquire the properties of an eye;Your ears, now worthless as wool, will become gems;Yea, your whole body will become a mirror,It will be as an eye or a bright gem in your bosom.First the hearing of the ear enables you to form ideas,Then these ideas guide you to the Beloved.Strive, then, to increase the number of these ideas,That they may guide you, like Majnun, to the Beloved.Concerning the unbelievers who say, “There is only this our present life; we live and we die, and naught but time destroyeth us.” 8To return; that prince played the fool,And took delight in the society of the damsel.O prince, suppose your dominion extend from east to west,Yet, as it endures not, esteem it transitory as lightningYea, O sleeping heart, know the kingdom that endures notForever and ever is only a mere dream.I marvel how long you will indulge in vain illusion,Which has seized you by the throat like a headsman.Know that even in this world there is a place of refuge; 9Hearken not to the unbeliever who denies it.His argument is this: he says again and again,“If there were aught beyond this life we should see it.”But if the child sees not the state of reason,Does the man of reason therefore forsake reason?And if the man of reason sees not the state of love,Is the blessed moon of love thereby eclipsed?The beauty of Joseph was not visible to his brethren;Was it therefore hidden from the eyes of Jacob?The eyes of Moses regarded his staff as a stick,But the divine eye saw it to be a deadly serpent.The eye of the head was at issue with the divine eye,But the latter prevailed and gave convincing proof.To the eyes of Moses his hand looked a mere hand,But to the divine eye it appeared a flashing light.This subject in its entirety is endless,But to the unbeliever it is a mere fanciful idea.The only realities to him are lust and gluttony;Speak not then to him of the mysteries of the Beloved.To us believers lust and gluttony are only ideas,Therefore we behold always the beauty of the Beloved.To all men whose creed is lust and gluttony,Applies the text, “To you be your creed, to me mine.” 10In the face of negations like these cut short speech,“O Ahmad, say little to an old Fire-worshipper!”“We distribute among them,” 11 to some carnal lusts, and to others angelic qualities.If the prince lacked the animal manliness of asses,Yet he possessed the true manliness of the prophets.He renounced lust and anger and concupiscence,And showed himself a man of the lineage of the prophets.Grant that he lacked the virility of asses,Yet God esteemed him a lord of lords.Let me be dead, so long as God regards me with favor!I am better off than the living who are rejected of God;The former is the kernel of manliness, the latter only the rind;The former is borne to Paradise, the latter to hell.The Prophet says, “Paradise is annexed to tribulation,But hell-fire follows indulgence in lust.” 12O Ayaz, who slayest demons like a male lion,Manliness of asses is naught, manliness of mind much.What sort of man dost thou think him who sports as a boy,But who has no comprehension of these chief matters?o thou who hast seen the delight of my connnandments,And risked thy life to perform them faithfully,Hear a tale of the sweetness of my commandments,That the meaning of this sweetness may be made plain.The story which follows is one in which Ayaz is himself the chief actor, and hence it may perhaps be inferred that this part of the poem had not received its final revision when the poet died. The king showed to all his courtiers in turn a valuable jewel, and asked them its value. Each declared it to be priceless. He thereupon ordered each of them to break it to pieces, but they refused, one after the other; on which he praised them highly and gave them presents. Finally the jewel came into the hands of Ayaz, and he, not being a mere imitator like the rest, nor being tempted by the rewards given to the rest, decided that the king’s command ought to be obeyed at all costs, and therefore broke the jewel to pieces. Blind imitation of current fashions and ruling “public opinion” is the way of the world, but its worthlessness is at once manifested when it is put to the test. True faith is a reasonable faith, not one adopted and held in mechanical and parrot-like fashion. The king then commanded that those courtiers whose faith had been shown to be mere “taqlid” or imitation, and not vital and intelligent, should be put to death; but Ayaz interceded for them, saying, “O Lord, punish them not if they forget or fall into sin;”13 although their plea that they sinned through forgetfulness is of no more weight than the plea of having sinned through drunkenness, seeing that both forgetfulness and drunkenness are willfully incurred. Those who die in amity with God have no cause to fear death, “It cannot harm them, for to their Lord will they return;”14 but those who die at enmity with God are in a very different position, and have therefore a very strong claim for mercy. The Egyptian magicians, when threatened by Pharaoh with death for believing in Moses, recognized the truth that death in such a cause would unite them with God, and that extinction of the phenomenal self, on which Pharaoh prided himself, would bring them to the real Self from whom they had been estranged by life on earth. Like Habib, the carpenter of Antioch, who was martyred for taking the part of ‘Isa’s two apostles in that city, they said, “O that my people knew how gracious God hath been to me, and that He hath made me one of His honored ones!” 15 A man can only say “I” with truth when he has mortified self and unlearnt to say “I” in the sense in which Pharaoh said it. Fakhru-’d-Din Razi 16 discoursed learnedly on this point, saying much of “incarnation” and “union” as the modes in which the real “I” of the Deity indwells in the human soul; but as he lacked the true mystic unction, his words only serve to darken counsel. 17 But here Ayaz breaks off; saying, “Who am I that I should say to the Almighty, ‘Grant pardon to these offenders’?” The Omniscient God needs not to be informed of their case, for He knows all; nor to be reminded of it, for He forgets nothing; nor to be urged to act mercifully, for He created men “for their own benefit, and not to derive benefit from them.” Such intercession, therefore, implies ignorance of God, and “such only of His servants as are possessed of knowledge of God truly fear God.” 18 God is at once center and circumference of the universe, and the only true wisdom consists in absolute self-surrender to His will, and this surrender of self will bring with it its own exceeding great reward. 
NOTES: 
Alluding to Story vii. Book II.2. Koran xxvii. 19.3. Koran xxxiii. 23.4. i.e., are based on hearsay.5. “When God manifested Himself to the mount He turned it to dust, and Moses fell in a swoon” (Koran vii. 139). As the bat cannot endure the sight of the sun, men cannot at once endure the full blaze of the beatific vision.6. A proverb which is not given by Freytag.7. Ideas and types lead men on to actual sight when they are strong enough to bear it. Job xlii. 5.8. Koran xlv. 23.9. Place of refuge, i.e., heavenly visions; a foretaste of the world to come (Gulshan i Raz, I. 679).10. Koran cix. 6.11. Koran xliii. 31.12. Cp. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, vol ii. .13. Koran ii. 286.14. Koran xxvi. 50.15. Koran xxxvi. 25.16. A great theologian of Khorasan who lived from A.D. 1150 to 1210. De Slane’s Ibn Khallikan, ii. 652.17. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 453, note.18. Koran xxxv. 25. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





BOOK VI. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





PROLOGUE. 
O LIFE of the heart, Husamu-’d-Din,: My zeal burnt within me to write this sixth part!The Masnavi became a standard through thy influence,Thy sword (Husam) has made it an exemplar to the worldO spiritual one, I now offer it to thee,This sixth part of the entire Masnavi.Enlighten the world’s six sides with its six parts,That it may illuminate him who is not illuminated!Love has naught to do with five senses or six sides,Its only aim is to be attracted to the Beloved!But haply leave may be given me hereafterTo tell those mysteries so far as they can be told,In a discourse more closely approximating to the factsThan these faint indications of those abstruse matters.Mysteries are not communicable, save to those who know;Mystery in the ear of infidels is no mystery.Nevertheless, this is a call to you from God;It matters not to Him whether ye accept or reject it.Noah repeated His call for nine hundred years,But his people only increased in rebellion.Never did he draw back from admonishing them,Never did he retire into the cave of silence.He said, “At the barking and howling of the dogsNo caravan ever turned back in its road.Nor does the full moon on a bright night cease shiningBecause of the howling of dogs on earth.The moon sheds her light, and the dogs howl;Every one acts according to his nature.To each one his office is allotted by the divine decree,And he acts agreeably to his nature.”Art thou thirsting for the Ocean of spirituality?Disport thyself on this island of the Masnavi!Disport thyself so long as thou seest every momentSpiritual verities revealed in this Masnavi.When the wind blows the grass off the water,The water then shows forth its own purity.Behold the bright and fresh sprays of coral,And the princely fruits growing in the water of life!So, when the Masnavi is purged of letters and words,It drops all these, and appears as the sea of Unity.Then speaker and hearer and spoken wordsAll three give up the ghost in that consummation.Bread-giver and bread-eater and bread itselfAre purified of their forms and turn to dust.But their essences in each of these three gradesAre distinguished, as in those states, so eternally. 1Their form turns to dust, but their essence not;If one says it does, tell him it does not.In the world of spirits all three await judgment,Sometimes wearing their earthly forms, sometimes not.The worth of a man depends on the objects of his aspiration.One day a student asked a preacher,Saying, “O most orthodox ornament of the pulpit,I have a question to ask, O lord of learning;Tell me the answer to it in this congregation.A bird sat on the top of a wall;Which was best, its head or its tail?”He replied, “If its face was towards the town,And its tail to the villages, then its face was best.But if its tail was towards the town, and its faceTowards the villages, then prefer its tail to its face.”A bird flies with its wings towards its nest,The wings of a man are his aspiration and aim.If a lover be befouled with good and evil,Yet regard not these; regard rather his aspiration.Though a falcon be all white and unmatched in form,If he hunts mice he is contemptible and worthless.And if an owl fixes his affection on the king,He is a falcon in reality; regard not his outward form.Adam’s clay was kneaded in the limits of a trough,Yet was he exalted above heaven and stars.“We have honored Adam” 2 was not addressed to the sky,But to Adam himself full of defects as he was.Did one ever propose to earth or heaven to receiveBeauty, reason, speech and aspiration? 3Would you ever offer to the heavensBeauty of face and acuteness of thought?O son, did you ever present your silver bodyAs an offering to the damsels pictured on bath walls?Nay, you pass by those pictures though fair as Huris,And offer yourself sooner to half-blind old women.What is there in the old women which the pictures lack,Which draws you from the pictures to the old women?Say not, for I will say it in plain words,’Tis reason, sense, perception, thought, and life.In the old woman life is infused,While the pictures of the bath have no life.If the pictures of the bath should stir with life (soul),They would uproot your love to all the old women.What is soul? ’Tis acquainted with good and evil,Rejoicing at pleasant things, grieving at His.Since, then, the principle of soul is knowledge,He who knows most is most full of soul.Knowledge is the effect flowing from soul;He who has most of it is most godlike.Seeing then, beloved, that knowledge is the mark of soul,He who knows most has the strongest soul.The world of souls is itself entirely knowledge,And he who is void of knowledge is void of soul.When knowledge is lacking in a man s nature,His soul is like a stone on the plain.Primal Soul is the theatre of God’s court,Soul of souls the exhibition of God Himself.All the angels were pure reason and soul,Yet when the new soul of Adam came, they were as its body.When in joy they crowded round that new soul, 4They bowed before it as body does before soul.Fear of men’s censure the greatest obstacle to acceptance of the true faith.O Husamu-’d-Din, I might tell some of thy many virtues,Were it not for the fear of the evil eyes.From evil eyes and malice-empoisoned breathsAlready have I suffered fatal wounds.Therefore I cannot relate thy ecstatic states,Save by hints of the ecstatic states of others.This manoeuvre is one of the devices of the heart,Whereby the heart’s feet wend their way to the truth.Many hearts and souls would become lovers of GodDid not evil eyes or evil ears hold them back.Of these Abu Talib, the Prophet’s uncle, was one;The malice of the Arabs scared him from the faith.He said, “What will the Arabs say of me?That my own nephew has perverted me from my religion!”Muhammad said, “O uncle, confess the faith to me,That I may strive with God for thee!”He said, “Nay; it will be published by them that hear;‘A secret known to more than two is known to every one.’ 5As I live in the midst of these Arabs,It will cause me to lose caste with them.Yet, had the mighty grace of God led the way,How could this fear have vied with God’s attraction?O Granter of aid, lend us aidIn this dilemma of the feeble will.Prayers for right guidance in the use of free will, which gift was refused by heavens and earth, but accepted by man to his own. 6This flux and reflux of resolves came to me from Thee,Else these tides of will had rested still, O God!By the same fiat whereby Thou madest me thus irresolute,Of Thy mercy deliver me from this irresolution!Thou triest me; O give me aid!For men are as women through this trial.How long, O Lord, is this trial to last?Give me one ruling principle, not ten principles!The whole world flees away from its own will and beingTowards self-abandonment and intoxication.In order to escape a while from self-consciousness,Men incur the reproach of wine and strong drink;For all know well this existence is a snare,This thought and memory and will only a hell.Therefore they flee from self to being beside themselves,Call it intoxication or call it preoccupation, O guided one.Ere it is annihilated, no single soulFinds admittance to the divine hall of audience.What is “ascension” to heaven? Annihilation of self;Self-abandonment is the creed and religion of lovers. 
NOTES: 
Koran xxxvi. 32: “But all gathered together shall be set before us.”2. Koran xvii. 72.3. “We proposed to the heavens and to the earth to receive the deposit, but they refused the burden. Man undertook to bear it, but bath proved unjust and senseless” (Koran xxxiii. 72).4. “We said unto the angels, ‘Prostrate yourselves before Adam,’ and they prostrated themselves, except Iblis” (Koran vi. 10).5. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, iii. 222.6. Koran xxxiii. 72, quoted above. “Deposit” is here interpreted of the will, the ability to go right or wrong. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY I. The Hindu Slave who loved his Master’s Daughter. 
A certain man had a Hindu slave, whom he had brought up along with his children, one of whom was a daughter. When the time came for giving the girl in marriage many suitors presented themselves, and offered large marriage portions to gain her alliance. At last her father selected one who was by no means the richest or noblest of the number, but pious and well-mannered. The women of the family would have preferred one of the richer youths, but the father insisted on having his own way, and the marriage was settled according to his wishes. As soon as the Hindu slave heard of this he fell sick, and the mistress of the family discovered that he was in love with her daughter, and aspired to the honor of marrying her. She was much discomposed at this unfortunate accident, and consulted her husband as to what was best to be done. He said, “Keep the affair quiet, and I will cure the slave of his presumption, in such a way that, according to the proverb, ‘The Shaikh shall not be burnt, yet the meat shall be well roasted.’” He directed his wife to flatter the slave with the hope that his wish would be granted, and the girl given to him in marriage. He then celebrated a mock marriage between the slave and the girl, but at night substituted for the girl a boy dressed in female attire, with the result that the bridegroom passed the night in quarrelling with his supposed bride. Next morning he had an interview with the girl and her mother, and said he would have no more to do with her, as, though her appearance was very seductive at a distance, closer acquaintance with her had altogether destroyed the charm. Just so the pleasures of the world seem sweet till they are tried, and then they are found to be very bitter and repulsive. The Prophet has declared that “Patience is the key of joy;” 1 in other words, that he who controls and restrains himself from grasping at worldly pleasures will find true happiness; but this precept makes no lasting impression on the bulk of mankind. When bitter experience overtakes them, as the pain of burning afflicts children, or moths sporting with fire, or the pain of amputation a thief, they curse the delusive temptations which brought this pain upon them; but no sooner is the pain abated than they run after the same pleasures as eagerly as ever. This is divinely ordained, that “God may bring to naught the craft of the infidels.” 2 Their hearts have, as it were, been kindled on the tinder-box of bitter experience, but God has put out the sparks of good resolution, and caused them to forget their experience and vows of abstinence according to the text, “Often as they kindle a beacon-fire for war doth God quench it.” 3 This is illustrated by an anecdote of a man who heard a footstep in his house at night, and at once struck a light; but the thief put it out without being observed, and the man remained under the impression that it had gone out of itself. This leads the poet again to dwell on his favorite theme of the sole agency of Allah. 
Then, to supply the necessary corrective of this doctrine, another anecdote is told concerning Mahmud and Ayaz. The courtiers grumbled because Ayaz received the stipend of thirty courtiers, and Mahmud by a practical test convinced them that the talents of Ayaz equalled those of thirty men. The courtiers replied that this was due to God’s grace, not to any merit on the part of Ayaz; and the king confuted them by pointing out that man’s responsibility and merit, or demerit, for his actions are recognized in the Koran. Iblis was condemned for saying to God, “Thou hast caused me to err,” 4 and Adam was commended or saying, “We have blackened ourselves.” 5 And elsewhere it is said, “Whosoever shall have wrought an atom’s weight of good shall behold it; and whoso shall have wrought an atom’s weight of evil shall behold it.” 6 
NOTES: 
Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, iii. 270.2. Koran viii. 18.3. Koran v. 69.4. Koran vii. 15 and 22.5. Koran vii. 15 and 22.6. Koran xcix. 7. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY II. The Fowler and the Bird. 
A fowler went out to catch birds, and disguised himself by wrapping his head up in leaves and grass, so as to avoid frightening the birds away from his snare. A bird of some sagacity came near him, and suspected something wrong, but foolishly lingered near, and began to question him as to his business. The fowler said he was a hermit who had retired from the world and dressed himself in weeds for the health of his soul. The bird said he was surprised to see a Mosalman doing this in contravention of the Prophet’s precept, “There is no monkery in Islam,” and his repeated declarations that Islam involves association with the faithful and avoidance of a solitary life. The fowler replied that a solitary life was allowed in heathen countries for the soul’s health. 1 The bird then asked what the grains of wheat were that were strewed on the trap. The fowler replied that they were the property of an orphan, which had been deposited with him in consequence of his known probity. The bird then asked permission to eat some, as he was very hungry, and the fowler, with much pretended reluctance, allowed him to do so. The moment he touched the grain the trap closed upon him, and he found himself a prisoner. He then abused the fowler for his trickery, but the fowler said he had only himself to blame for his greediness in eating the food which belonged to an orphan. The moral is, that it is not destiny which leads people into afflictions, but their own errors and vices. 
The bird’s cries to God for aid.When he had eaten the grain he was caught in the trap,And began to recite the chapters “Yasin” and “An’am.”Then he began to wail and cry loudly,So that the very fowler and his trap shook with grief.He said, “My back is broken by the conflict of my thoughts;O Beloved One, come and stroke my head in mercy!The palm of Thy hand on my head gives me rest,Thy hand is a sign of Thy bounteous providence.Remove not Thy shadow from my head,I am afflicted, afflicted, afflicted!Sleep has deserted my eyesThrough my longing for Thee, O Envy of cypresses!Though I be unworthy of Thy favor, how were itIf thou shouldst regard the grieves of unworthy me?What claim of right can a non-existent thing makeTo have the doors of Thy bounty opened to it?Yet Thy bounty had regard to my senseless dustAnd endued it with the ten jewels of the sensesFive external senses and five internal senses,Whereby inanimate seed became a living man.O Light on high! what is repentance without Thy graceBut a mere mockery of the beard of repentance;Thou rootest up the hairs of such repentance,Repentance is the shadow, Thou the shining Moon.Alas! Thou hast ruined my house and home;How can I cease wailing while Thou oppressest me?How can I flee away when there is no living away?Without Thy sustaining lordship there is no slave.O take my life, Thou that art the source of life!For apart from Thee I am wearied of my life.I am a lover well versed in lovers’ madness,I am weary of learning and sense.Since my bashfulness is destroyed, I will publish secrets;How long must I bear this trepidation and anxiety?Formerly I was covered by modesty as by a veil,Now I will leap from it under Thy coverlet!O comrades, our Beloved has closed up all paths;We are as lame deer, and He as a raging lion.Say what remedy is there but resignation 2When one is fallen into the hands of the raging lion?”The poet then passes on to the subject of the need for constant watchfulness, in order to avoid the snares of the world, and not to miss the divine blessing whenever it may appear. There is a tradition, “When half the night has passed Allah will descend to earth, and cry, ‘Ho, ye that ask, it shall be answered to you; and ye that crave pardon, it shall be pardoned to you; and ye that petition, your petitions shall be granted.’” But all who sleep the sleep of negligence will miss the promised blessing. This is illustrated by the story of a lover who obtained an assignation with his mistress, but when she came, was found asleep, and was accordingly rejected. 
NOTES: 
See Miskkat ul Masabih, ii. 541.2. “To God I commit my case” (Koran xl. 47). 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY III. The Drunken Turkish Amir and the Minstrel. 
Then follow exhortations to undergo “the pains of negation,” as they are called in the Gulshan i Raz, i.e., even as the great saint and poet Faridu-’d-Din ‘Attar cast away his drugs, to cast one’s own will, knowledge, power, and self” into the unique river of “annihilation,” 1 and from that state to rise to the higher state of eternal existence in God. The end and object of all negation is to attain to subsequent affirmation, as the negation in the creed, “There is no God,” finds its complement and purpose in the affirmation “but God.” Just so the purpose of negation of self is to clear the way for the apprehension of the fact that there is no existence but The One. The intoxication of life and its pleasures and occupations veils the Truth from men’s eyes, and they ought to pass on to the spiritual intoxication which makes men beside themselves and lifts them to the beatific vision of eternal Truth. This is the same thing as saying they must pass on from negation to affirmation, from ignorance to the highest knowledge. This is illustrated by the story of the Turkish noble and the minstrel, which is given with an apology for using illustrations derived from drunkenness. A Turkish noble awoke from his drunken sleep, and called his minstrel to enliven him. The minstrel was a spiritual man, and proceeded to improve the occasion by singing a song with a deep spiritual meaning: 
“I know not if thou art a moon or an idol,I know not what thou requirest of me.I know not what service to pay thee,Whether to keep silence or to speak.Thou art not apart from me, yet, strange to say,I know not where I am, or where thou art.I know not wherefore thou art dragging me,Now embracing me, and now wounding me!” 
Thus the whole of his song consisted of repetitions of the words, “I know not.” At last the noble could endure it no longer, and he took a stick and threatened to beat the minstrel, saying, “O wretch, tell us something you do know, and do not repeat what you do not know. if I ask you whence you come or what you have eaten, and you answer only by negations, your answer is a waste of time. Say what you mean by all these negations.” The minstrel replied, “My meaning is a concealed one. I fear to make affirmations in opposition to your negations, so I state negations that you may get a hint of the corresponding affirmations from them. I now hint the truth to you in my song; and when death comes to you, you will learn the mysteries which at present I can only hint.” 
Spiritual mysteries set forth in the Masnavi under similes of intoxication.That wine of God is gained from that minstrel, 2This bodily wine from this minstrel.Both of these have one and the same name in speech,But the difference between their worth is great.Men’s bodies are like pitchers with closed mouths;Beware, till you see what is inside them.The pitcher of this body holds the water of life,Whilst that one holds deadly poison.If you look at the contents you are wise;If you look only at the vessel you are misguided.Know words resemble these bodies,And the meaning resembles the soul.The body’s eyes are ever intent on bodies,The soul’s eyes on the reasonable soul;Wherefore, in the figures of the words of the Masnavi,The form misleads, but the inner meaning guides.In the Koran it is declared that its parables“Mislead some and guide some.” 3O God! when a spiritual man talks of wine,How can a fellow spiritual man mistake his meaning?Thus that minstrel began his intoxicating song,“O give me Thy cup, Thou whom I see not!Thou art my face; what wonder if I see it not?Extreme nearness acts as an obscuring veil. 4Thou art my reason; what wonder if I see Thee notThrough the multitude of intervening obstacles?Thou art ‘nearer to me than my neck vein,’ 5How can I call to Thee, ‘Ho,’ as if thou wert far off?Nay, but I will mislead some by calling in the desert,To hide my Beloved from those of whom I am jealous!” 
This is illustrated by an anecdote of the Prophet and Ayisha. Ayisha was once sitting with the Prophet without her veil, when a blind man came in. Ayisha, knowing well the jealous disposition of her husband, at once prepared to retire on which the Prophet said, “The man is blind and cannot see you.” Ayisha replied by signs that though the man could not see her she could see him. Just so the spiritual man is jealous of exposing his mysteries to the gaze of the profane, and from excess of caution veils them in signs and hints. 
Then comes a commentary on the tradition, “Die before you die,” i.e., mortify your carnal passions and lusts, and deny and annihilate your carnal “ self” before the death of the body overtakes you. Men who put off repentance till they are at the point of death are likened to the Shi’as of Aleppo, who every year on the Ashura, or tenth day of Muharram, meet at the Antioch gate to bewail the martyrdom of Hasan and Husain. Once, while they were thus engaged, a Sunni poet arrived at the city, and inquired the reason of this excessive grief and mourning. The Shi’as rebuked him for his ignorance of sacred history, and he said, “This martyrdom happened a long time ago; but it would seem, from your excessive grief, that the news of it has only just reached you. You must have been sleeping all this time not to have heard it before, and now you are mourning for your own sleepiness!” To the truly spiritual, who have drunk of God’s wine and bear the “tokens of it on their foreheads,” 6 death is an occasion for rejoicing, not for wailing. The man who is engrossed with the trifling pleasures of the world and blind to the ample provision made for the soul is like an ant in a barn of wheat, toiling to carry off a single grain, when ample stores of wheat are already at its disposal. Spiritual men must continue urging the worldly to repent and avail themselves of this heavenly provision for their souls, careless, like Noah, whether their preaching is listened to or not. This is illustrated by an anecdote of a man who knocked at the door of an empty house at midnight, in order to give notice that it was time to prepare the meal taken at dawn in Ramazan. 
Reason for knocking at the empty house.You have said your say; now hear my answer,So as not to remain in astonishment and bewilderment.Though to you this time seems midnight,To me the dawn of joyful morn seems nigh.To the vulgar all parts of the world seem dead,But to God they are instinct with sense and love.And as to your saying that “this house is empty,Why then should I beat a drum before it?”Know that the people of God expend money,And build many mosques and holy places,And spend health and wealth in distant pilgrimages,In ecstatic delight, like intoxicated lovers;And none of them ever say, “The Ka’ba is empty;”How can one who knows the truth say that?These people are ranged in battle array,And risk their lives to gain God’s favor;One plunged in calamities like Job himself,Another exhibiting patience like Jacob.Thousands of them are thirsty and afflicted,Striving in earnest desire to do God’s will.I likewise, in order to please the merciful God,Beat my drum at every door in hope of dawn.Seek ye a purchaser who will pay you gold;Where will you find one more liberal than God?He buys the worthless rubbish which is your wealth,He pays you the light that illumines your heart.He accepts these frozen and lifeless bodies of yours,And gives you a kingdom beyond what you dream of.He takes a few drops of your tears,And gives you the divine fount sweeter than sugar.He takes your sighs fraught with grief and sadness,And for each sigh gives rank in heaven as interest.In return for the sigh-wind that raised tear-clouds,God gave Abraham the title of “Father of the faithful.”Come! in this incomparable and crowded martSell your old goods and take a kingdom in payment! 
NOTES: 
Koran cxii. 4.2. “A wine cup tempered at the camphor fountain shall the just quaff” (Koran lxxvi. 5).3. Koran ii. 24.4. See couplet 122 of the Guishan i Raz:“When the object looked at is very close to the eye,The eye is darkened so that it cannot see it.”I.e., When man is united with God he can no longer behold Him, for he is dwelling in Him.5. Koran l. 15.6. Koran xlviii. 29. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY IV. The Purchase of Bilal. 
To illustrate the rich recompense that is awarded to those who are faithful in tribulation, the story of Bilal is next recounted at length. Bilal was an Abyssinian slave belonging to a Jew of Mecca, and had incurred his master’s displeasure in consequence of having embraced Islam. For this offence his master tortured him by exposing him to the heat of the midday sun, and beating him with thorns. But notwithstanding his anguish, Bilal would not recant his faith, and uttered only the cry, “Ahad, Ahad!” “The One, the One God!” At this moment Abu Bakr, the “Faithful witness,” happened to pass by, and was so struck by his constancy that he resolved to buy him of the Jew. After much higgling and attempts at cheating on the Jew’s part he succeeded in doing so, and at once set him free. When the Prophet heard of this purchase he said to Abu Bakr, “Give me a share in him;” but Abu Bakr told him, somewhat to his annoyance, that he had already set him free. Notwithstanding this Bilal attached himself to the Prophet, and was afterwards promoted to the honourable post of the Prophet’s Mu’azzin.This is followed by the story of Hilal, another holy man who, like Bilal and Luqman and Joseph, served a noble in the capacity of groom. His affections were set on things above, and he was ever pressing upwards towards the high mark of spiritual exaltation, and saying, like Moses, “I will not stop till I reach the confluence of the two seas, and for years will I journey on.” 1 Herein he presented a great contrast to ordinary men, who are ever giving way to their lusts, and so being dragged down into the state of mere animals, or even lower. Hilal’s master was a Mosalman, yet one whose eyes were only partially open to the truth. He was in the habit of asking his guests their age; and if they answered doubtfully, saying, “Perhaps eighteen, or seventeen, or sixteen, or even fifteen,” he would rebuke them, saying, “As you seem to be putting yourself lower and lower, you had better go back at once to your mother’s womb.” These guests are a type of men who lower themselves from the rank of humanity to that of animals. This master, however, was blind to Hilal’s spiritual excellence, and allowed him to drag on a miserable existence in his stables. At last Hilal fell sick; but no one cared for him, till the Prophet himself, warned by a divine intimation, came to visit him, and commiserated his wretched condition. Hilal proved himself to be faithful through tribulation; for, instead of grumbling at his lot, he replied, “How is that sleep wretched which is broken by the advent of the Sun of prophecy? or how can he be called athirst on whose head is poured the water of life?” In truth, Hilal had by degrees become purified from the stain of earthly existence and earthly qualities, and washed in the fountain of the water of life, i.e., the holy revelations of the Prophet, till he had attained the exalted grade of purity enjoined on those who would study God’s Word aright. 2 
Growth in grace is accomplished by slow degrees, and not per saltum.Since you have told the story of Hilal (the new moon)Now set forth the story of Badr (the full moon).That new moon and that full moon are now united,Removed from duality and defect and shortcomings.That Hilal is now exalted above inward defect;His outward defects served as degrees of ascension.Night after night that mentor taught him grades of ascentAnd through his patient waiting gave him happiness.The mentor says, “O raw hastener, through patient waiting,You must climb to the summit step by step.Boil your pot by degrees and in a masterly way;Food boiled in mad haste is spoiled.Doubtless God could have created the universeBy the fiat ‘Be!’ in one moment of time;Why, then, did He protract His work over six days,Each of which equaled a thousand years, O disciple?Why does the formation of an infant take nine months?Because God’s method is to work by slow degrees,Why did the formation of Adam take forty days?Because his clay was kneaded by slow degrees.Not hurrying on like you, O raw one,Who claim to be a Shaikh whilst yet only a child!You run up like a gourd higher than all plants,But where is your power of resistance or combat?You have leant on trees or on walls,And so mounted up like a gourd, O little dog rose;Even though your prop may be a lofty cypress,At last you are seen to be dry and hollow.O gourd, your bright green hue soon turns yellow.For it is not a natural but an artificial color.”This is illustrated by an anecdote of an ugly old hag who painted her face to make it look pretty, but was detected and exposed to scorn. 
NOTES: 
Koran xviii. 59.2. Koran lvi. 79. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY V. The Sufi and the Qazi. 
A sick man laboring under an incurable disease went to a physician for advice. The physician felt his pulse, and perceived that no treatment would cure him, and therefore told him to go away and do whatever he had a fancy for. This was the advice given by God to the Israelites when they were seen to be incurable by the admonitions of the prophets. “Do what you will, but God’s eye is on all your doings.” 1 The sick man blessed the physician for his agreeable prescription, and at once went to a stream, where he saw a Sufi bathing his feet. He was seized with a desire to hit the Sufi on the back, and, calling to mind the physician’s advice, at once carried his wish into effect. The Sufi jumped up, and was about to return the blow, but when he saw the weakly and infirm condition of his assailant he restrained himself. He disregarded his present angry impulse, and had regard to the future, so that the non-existent future became to him more really existent than the existing present. Here the poet digresses to point out that when wise men recognize the true relative importance of the present and the future they cease to shrink from death and annihilation, which lifts them to a higher and nobler life. This is illustrated by an anecdote of Mahmud of Ghazni, quoted from Faridu- ‘d-Din ‘Attar. Mahmud, in one of his campaigns, took prisoner a Hindu boy, who at first regarded him with the greatest dread, in consequence of the stories he had heard of him from his mother, but afterwards experienced Mahmud’s kindness and tenderness, and came to know him and love him. So it is with death. According to the Hadis “Those who have passed away do not grieve because of death, but because of wasted opportunities in life.” The Masnavi is “a shop of poverty and self-abnegation,” and a treasury containing only the doctrines of “Unity;” and if its stories suggest aught else, that is due to the evil promptings of Iblis, who also misled the Prophet himself to attribute undue power to the idols Lat and ‘Uzza and Manat, in a verse which was afterwards cancelled. 2 The Sufi, being full of the spirit of self-abnegation, did not retaliate on his weak, assailant but led him before the Qazi. On learning the facts of the case the Qazi said, “This Faqir is sick to death, and you, being a Sufi, are, according to your profession, dead to the world. How, then, can I award a penalty against him in your favor? I am a judge, not of the dead, but of the living.” The Sufi was dissatisfied with this view of the case, and again pressed the Qazi to do him justice. On this the Qazi asked the sick Faqir how much money he had, and on his replying, “Six dirhams,” took pity on him, and let him off with a fine of three dirhams only. The moment the sentence was pronounced the sick Faqir went up to the Qazi and struck him a blow on the back, and cried out, “Now take the other three dirhams and let me go!” The Sufi then pointed out to the Qazi that by his ill-timed leniency to the Faqir he had brought this blow upon himself, and urged him to apply in his own case those principles of mercy and forgiveness which he had proposed in the case of another. The Qazi said that, for his part, he recognized every blow and misfortune that might befall him as divinely ordained, and sent for his good, according to the text, “Laugh little and weep much,” 3 and that his judgment in the matter of the Faqir had not been dictated by impulse, but by inspiration. 4 The Sufi again asked him how evils and misfortunes could proceed from the divine fount of good, and the Qazi replied that what seems good and evil to us has no absolute existence, but is merely as the foam on the surface of the vast ocean. Moreover, every misfortune occurring to the faithful in this life will be amply compensated for in the life to come. The Sufi asked why this world should not be so arranged that only good should be experienced in it, and the Qazi replied by telling him an anecdote of a Turk and a tailor. The Turk, who typifies the careless pleasure-seeker, was so intent on listening to the jokes and amusing stories of the tailor, typifying the seductive world, that he allowed himself to be robbed of the silk which was to furnish him with a vesture for eternity. The Sufi again retorted that he did not see why the world would not get on better without the evil in it, and the Qazi replied with the poet’s favorite argument that there would be no possibility of being virtuous if there were no temptations to be vicious. As Bishop Butler says, this life is a state of probation, and such a state necessarily involves trials and difficulties and dangers to be resisted and overcome. 
The dead regret not dying, but having lost opportunities in life.Well said that Leader of mankind,That whosoever passes away from the worldDoes not grieve and lament over his death,But grieves ever over lost opportunities.He says, “Why did I not keep death always in view,Which is the treasury of wealth and sustenance?Why did I blindly all my life set my affectionsOn vain shadows which perish at death?My regret is not that I have died,But that I rested on these vain shadows in life.I saw not that my body was a mere shadow or foam,Which foam rises out of and lives on the Ocean (God).When the Ocean casts its foam-drops to land,Go to the graveyard and behold them,And ask them, “Where is your motion and activity?The Ocean has cast you into a mortal sickness!”They will answer by their condition, if not with words,“Put this question to the Ocean, not to us!”How can mere foam move unless moved by the waves?How can dust mount on high unless raised by wind?When you see the dust-cloud, see the wind too!When you see the foam, see the ocean that heaves it!Ah! look till you see your own real final cause,The rest of you is only fat and flesh, warp and woof.Your fat kindles no light or flame in a lamp;Your kneaded flesh is not good for roasting.Burn up, then, all this body of yours with discernment;Rise to sight, to sight, to sight!Virtue cannot exist without temptation and difficulties to be overcome.The Sufi said, “The Great Helper is ableTo procure for us profit without loss.He who casts into the fire roses and treesCan accomplish good without injury to any.He who extracts the rose from the thornCan also turn this winter into spring.He who exalts the heads of the cypressesIs able also out of sadness to bring joy.He by whose fiat all non-existent things exist,What harm to Him were it if He made them eternal?He who gave to the body a soul and made it live,What loss to Him were it if He never caused it to die?How would it be if That Liberal One were to giveTheir hearts’ desire to his slaves without toil,And keep away from these feeble onesThe ambushed snares of lust and temptations of Iblis?”The Qazi said, “If there were no bitter things,And no opposition of fair and foul, stone and pearl,And no lust or Satan or concupiscence,And no wounds or war or fraud,Pray, O destroyer of virtue, by what name and titleCould the King of kings address His slaves?How could He say, ‘O temperate or O meek one!’Or, ‘O courageous one, or O wise one?’How could there be temperate, gentle, or liberal menIf there were no cursed Satan to tempt them astray?Rustam and Hamza would be all the same as cowards;Wisdom and knowledge would be useless and vain.Wisdom and knowledge serve to guide the wanderers;Were there but one road wisdom would be needless.To pamper the house of your body fleeting as water,Do you think it right to ruin both worlds?I know you are pure of guile and ripe,And ask this only to edify the ignorant.The ills of fortune and all troubles soeverAre better than exile from God and neglect of Him;For the former pass away, but the latter abide;He is happy who carries a wary heart before God.” 5 
This is illustrated by an anecdote of a woman who complained of the hard life she had to lead with her husband owing to his poverty, and was silenced by being asked whether she would prefer to be divorced. No troubles are so hard to hear as separation from the Beloved. Fasting and holy war bring pains with them, but not so great as those incurred by banishment from God. In the midst of their troubles God is ever caring for His servants, and they must not let their tribulations blot out the memory of God’s previous goodness to them.To do this shows an entire absence of growth in grace. This is illustrated by an anecdote of a sage and a monk. The sage asked the monk which was the older, his white beard or himself. The monk replied that he himself was older by some years, whereupon the sage rebuked him for his ignorance, saying his beard had grown pure and white, but he was still black with sin, and had progressed not at all in goodness since he was born. 
Each of our members testifies to God’s bounties towards us.Inquire now, I pray, of each one of your members;These dumb members have a thousand tongues.Inquire the detail of the bounties of the All-sustainer,Which are recorded in the volume of the universe.Day and night you are eagerly asking for news,Whilst every member of your body is telling you news.Since each member of your body issued from Not-being,How much pleasure has it seen, and how much pain?For no member grows and flourishes without pleasure,And each member is weakened by every pain. 6The member endures, but that pleasure is forgotten,Yet not all forgotten, but hidden from the senses.Like summer wherein cotton is produced,The cotton remains, but the summer is forgotten.Or like ice which is formed in great frost,The frost departs, but the ice is still before us.The ice is mindful of that extreme cold,And even in winter that crop is mindful of the summer.In like manner, O son, every member of your bodyTells you tales of God’s bounties to your body.Even as a woman who has borne twenty children,Each child tells a tale of pleasure felt by her.She became not pregnant save after sexual pleasure,Can a garden bloom without the spring?Pregnant women and their teeming wombsTell tales of love frolics in the spring.So every tree which nurtures its fruitsHas been, like Mary, impregnated by the Unseen King.Though fire’s heat be hidden in the midst of water,Yet a thousand boiling bubbles prove it present.Though the heat of the fire be working unseen,Yet its bubbles signify its presence plainly.In like manner, the members of those enjoying “union”Become big with child, viz., with forms of “states” and “words.” 7Gazing on the beauty of these forms they stand agape,And the forms of the world vanish from their sight.These spiritual progenies are not born of the elements,And are perforce invisible to the sensual eye.These progenies are born of divine apparitions,And are therefore bidden by veils without color.I said “born,” but in reality they are not born;I used this expression only by way of indication.But keep silence till the King bids you speak,Offer not your nightingale songs to these roses;For they themselves are saying to you in loud tones,“O nightingale, hold your peace, and listen to us!”Those two kinds of fair forms (ecstatic states and words)Are undeniable proofs of a previous “union;”Yea, those two kinds of exalted manifestationsAre the evident fruits of a preceding wedlock.The ecstasy is past, but your members recall it;Ask them about it, or call it to mind yourself.When sorrow seizes you, if you are wise,You will question that sorrow-fraught moment,Saying to it, “O sorrow, who now deniestThy portion of bounty given thee by the Perfect One,Even if each moment be not to thee a glad spring,Yet of what is thy body, like a rose-heap, a storehouse?Thy body is a heap of roses, thy thought rosewater;‘Twere strange if rosewater ignored the rose-heap!” 
NOTES: 
Koran xli. 40.2. Koran liii. 19, and Rodwell’s note.3. Koran ix. 84.4. Koran liii. 3.5. Koran xxvi. 88.6. Cp. Nicom. Ethics, x., iv. 6.7. Compare Gulshan i Raz, I. 624. Ecstatic words and states are the offspring of communion with God. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY VI. The Faqir and the Hidden Treasure. 
Notwithstanding the clear evidence of God’s bounty, engendering these spiritual states in men, philosophers and learned men, wise in their own conceit, obstinately shut their eyes to it, and look afar off for what is really close to them, so that they incur the penalty of “being branded on the nostrils,” 1 adjudged against unbelievers. This is illustrated by the story of a poor Faqir who prayed to God that he might be fed without being obliged to work for his food. A divine voice came to him in his sleep and directed him to go to the house of a certain scribe and take a certain writing that he should find there. He did so, and on reading the writing found that it contained directions for finding a hidden treasure. The directions were as follows: “Go outside the city to the dome which covers the tomb of the martyr; turn your back to the tomb and your face towards Mecca, place an arrow in your bow, and where the arrow falls there dig for the treasure.” But before the Faqir had time to commence the search the rumor of the writing and its contents had reached the king, who at once sent and took it away from the Faqir, and began to search for the treasure on his own account. After shooting many arrows and digging in all directions the king failed to find the treasure, and got weary of searching, and returned the writing to the Faqir. Then the Faqir tried what he could do, but failed altogether to hit the spot where the treasure was buried. At last, despairing of success by his own unaided efforts, he cast his care upon God, and implored the divine assistance. Then a voice from heaven came to him, saying, “You were directed to fix an arrow on your bow, but not to draw your bow with all your might, as you have been doing. Shoot as gently as possible, that the arrow may fall close to you, for the hidden treasure is indeed ‘nearer to you than your neck-vein.’ “2 Men overlook the spiritual treasures close to them, and for this reason it is that prophets have no honor in their own countries, as is illustrated by the cases of the saint Abu-’l-Hasan Khirqani and the Prophet Hud or Heber. 
God rules men by alternations of hope and fear.This sad Faqir too put up his cries for aid,And bore off the ball of acceptance from the field.But at times he distrusted the efficacy of his prayers,On account of the delay in answering them.Again, hope of the mercy of the LordArose in his heart as an earnest of rejoicing.When he was hopeless and ceasing to pray in wearinessHe heard from God the word “Ascend!”God is an Abaser and an ExalterWithout these two processes nothing comes into being.Behold the abasement of earth and uplifting of heaven;Without these two heaven would not revolve, O man!The abasement and exaltation of earth is otherwise,Half the year is barren, half green and verdant.The abasement and exaltation of weary timeIs otherwise again, half day and half night.The abasement and exaltation of this compound bodyIs now health and now grievous sickness.Know all the conditions of the world are in this wise,Drought, famine, peace, war, and trials.This world flies, as it were, with these two wings;Through these all souls are homes of hope and fear;So that the world keeps trembling like leaves,In the cold and hot winds of death and resurrection.Till the jar of pure wine of our ‘Isa (Unity)Shall supersede the jar of many-colored wine (plurality),For that world (of unity) is as a saltpan;Whatever enters it loses its varied hues.On the text, “Verily I am about to place a Khalifa or Vicegerent on earth” 3.Whereas the aim and will of the Merciful GodInclined to the revelation and manifestation of Himself,And one opposite cannot be shown but by its opposite,And that Unique King of kings has no opposite or peer, 4Therefore that Lord of the heart set up a Khalifa,To serve as a mirror to reflect His own sovereignty.Therefore He gave him unlimited purity and light,And on the other side He set darkness opposing the light. 5God set up two standards, a white and a black one,The one Adam and the other Iblis;And between these two mighty armiesEnsued war and battle and all we have witnessed.Thus, too, in the second generation lived pure Abel;Cain was the opposite of his pure light.In like manner these two standards of right and wrongWere borne aloft till the age of Nimrod.Nimrod was the opponent and adversary of Abraham,And their opposing camps warred and fought one another.When God grew weary of the length of this war,His fire was appointed to arbitrate between them.He commanded fire and its flaming tormentTo settle the matter in dispute between them.Age after age these two parties contended,Even till the time of Pharaoh and gentle Moses.Between these two the war was waged for years,And when it passed all bounds and affliction increasedGod made the water of the Nile a judge between them,That the one who deserved preeminence should endure.In like manner it went on till the time of MustafaAnd Abu Jahl, that prince of iniquity.Likewise did God ordain a punishment for the Thamud,Namely, an earthquake which destroyed their lives.Likewise a punishment for the Adites,Namely, a swiftly rising and violent wind.Likewise God ordained acute punishment for Qarun;For the earth concealed wrath under its mildness,Till all its mildness was converted into wrath,And it swallowed up Qarun and his wealth in its depth.So with the mouthful which nourishes your bodyAnd wards off the darts of hunger like a cuirass,When God instils wrath into this mouthful of bread,That same bread will choke you like a halter.This same garment which protects you from the cold,God may give it the quality of intense cold,So that this warm vest may become to your bodyCold as ice and biting as frost;So that you will cast off these furs and silks,And seek for a refuge from cold with cold itself.You have only one eye, not two (for these two possibilities).You have forgotten the story of the “shadowing cloud.” 6God’s command came to city and village,And to house and wall, saying, “Afford no shade!Ward not off the pouring rain and the sun’s heat;”Till those men hasted to listen to the prophet Shu’aib,Saying, ‘O king, have pity; most of us are dead!’But read the rest of the tale in the commentaries.When that Omnipotent hand made the staff a serpent,If you have reason, that portent should suffice.You have sight indeed, but fail to mark carefully;Your eyes are dimmed and closed with fat.The heavenly treasure lies “nearer to us than our neck-vein”.The Faqir was in this state when a divine voice came,And God thus solved his difficulties,Saying, “The voice told you to place an arrow on the bow,It did not bid you draw the bowstring to the utmost;It did not bid you draw the bow with all your might;It said, ‘Adjust an arrow,’ not ‘Draw the bow fully.’You elevated the bow to excess,You magnified unduly the bowman’s art,Go! abandon this strong bowmanship,Fix an arrow on the string, but make it not fly far.When it falls, dig in that spot and search,Abandon force and seek the treasure with humility.”God is “what is nearer to you than your neck-vein,”You have cast the arrow of speculation afar off.O you, who have made ready your bow and arrows,The game is close to you, and you shoot too far off.The further a man shoots, the further off he is,And the more removed from the treasure he seeks.The philosopher kills himself with thinking,Tell him that his back is turned to that treasure;Tell him that the more he runs to and fro,The Almighty says, “Make efforts in our ways,” 7Not “Make efforts away from us,” O restless one.Like Canaan, who went away, from shame to follow Noah,Up to the top of that lofty mountain,The more he sought safety on that mountain,The further was he removed from the safe asylum.So this Faqir, in search of that hidden treasure,Day after day drew his bow stronger and stronger;And the harder he drew his bow,The further was he from the seat of that treasure.This parable applies to all times,For the soul of the ignorant is pledged to misfortune.Because the ignorant man is ashamed of a master,Perforce he goes and opens a new school for himself.That school is higher than your true master, O beloved,And hard of access, and full of scorpions and snakes.Straightway overthrow it, and turn back againTo the green garden and sweet watered meadows.Not like Canaan, who, through pride and ignorance,Sought his ark of safety on a protecting mountain.His far-shooting learning veiled his eyes,While his heart’s desire was all the while in his grasp.Ah! oftentimes have learning and genius and witProved to the traveler to be Ghouls and highwaymen!“The majority of those in Paradise are the simple,” 8Who have escaped the snares of philosophy.Strip yourself bare of overweening intellect,That grace may ever be shed upon you from above.Cleverness is the opposite of humility and submission,Quit cleverness, and consort with simple-mindedness! 
NOTES: 
Koran lxviii. 16.2. Koran l. 15.3. Koran ii. 28.4. Because, as Sir T. Browne says, “God is all things.”5. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 265, and note.6. Koran xxvi. 189. The cloud emitted heat instead of rain, to punish those who disregarded Shu’aib, or Jethro.7. Koran xxix. 69.8. A Hadis. C Cor. i. 25, 26. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY VII. The Three Travelers. 
A Mosalman was traveling with two unbelievers, a Jew and a Christian. Like wisdom linked with the flesh and the devil. God was “nigh unto His faithful servant,” 1 and when the first stage was completed He caused a present of sweetmeats to be laid before the travelers. As the Jew and the Christian had already eaten their evening meal when the sweetmeats arrived, they proposed to lay them aside till the morrow; but the Mosalman, who was keeping fast, and therefore could not eat before nightfall, proposed to eat them that night. To this the other two refused to consent, alleging that the Mosalman wanted to eat the whole of the sweetmeats himself. Then the Mosalman proposed to divide them into three portions, so that each might eat his own portion when he pleased; but this also was objected to by the others, who quoted the proverb, “The divider is in hell” The Mosalman explained to them that this proverb meant the man who divides his allegiance between God and lust; but they still refused to give way, and the Mosalman therefore submitted, and lay down to sleep in the endurance of the pangs of hunger. Next morning, when they awoke, it was agreed between them that each should relate his dreams, and that the sweetmeats should be awarded to him whose dream was the best. The Jew said that he had dreamed that Moses had carried him to the top of Mount Sinai, and shown him marvelous visions of the glory of heaven and the angels. The Christian said he had dreamed that ‘Isa had carried him up to the fourth heaven and shown him all the glories of the heavens. Finally the Mosalman said that the Prophet Muhammad had appeared to him in person, and after commending him for his piety in saying his prayers and keeping fast so strictly on the previous night, had commanded him to eat up those divinely provided sweetmeats as a reward, and he had accordingly done so. The Jew and the Christian were at first annoyed with him for thus stealing a march upon them; but on his pointing out that he had no option but to obey the Prophet’s commands, they admitted that he had done right, and that his dream was the best, as he had been awake, while they were asleep. The moral is, that the divine treasure is revealed as an immediate intuition to those who seek it with prayer and humble obedience, and not to those who seek to infer and deduce its nature and quality from the lofty abstractions of philosophy. 
Lofty philosophical speculation does not lead to the knowledge of God.The Mosalman said, “O my friends,My lord, the Prophet Muhammad, appeared to meAnd said, ‘The Jew has hurried to the top of Sinai,And plays a game of love with God’s interlocutor;The Christian has been carried by ‘Isa, Lord of blissUp to the summit of the fourth heavenThou who art left behind and hast endured anguish,Arise quickly and eat the sweetmeats and confections!Those two clever and learned men have ascended,And read their titles of dignity and exaltation;Those two exalted ones have found exalted science,And rivaled the very angels in intellect;O humble and simple and despised one,Arise and eat of the banquet of the divine sweets!”They said to him, “Then you have been gluttonous;Well indeed! you have eaten all the sweets!”He answered, “When my sovereign lord commanded me,Who am I that I should abstain from obeying?Would you, O Jew, resist the commands of MosesIf he bade you do something, either pleasant or not?Would you, O Christian, rebel against ‘Isa’s commands,Whether those commands were agreeable or the reverse?How could I rebel against the ‘Glory of the prophets’?Nay, I ate the sweets, and am now happy.”They replied, “By Allah, you have seen a true vision;Your vision is better than a hundred like ours.Your dream was seen by you when awake, O happy one,For it was seen to be real by your being awake.”Quit excessive speculation and inordinate science,’Tis service of God and good conduct that gains its end.’Tis for this that God created us,“We created not mankind save to worship us” 2What profit did his science bring to Samiri? 3His science excluded him from God’s portals.Consider what Qarun gained by his alchemy;He was swallowed up in the depths of the earth.Abu-l Jahl, again, what gained he from his witSave to be hurled head-foremost into hell for infidelity?Know real science is seeing the fire directly,Not mere talk, inferring the fire from the smoke.Your scientific proofs are more offensive to the wiseThan the urine and breath whence a physician infers.If these be your only proofs, O son,Smell foul breath and inspect urine like physicians.Such proofs are as the staff of a blind man,Which prove only the blindness of the holder.All your outcry and pompous claims and bustleOnly say, “I cannot see, hold me excused!” 
This is illustrated be an anecdote of a peasant who, hearing a proclamation issued by the Prince of Tirmid, to the effect that a large reward would be given to him who should take a message to Samarcaud in the space of four days, hurried to Tirmid by relays of post-horses in the utmost haste, and threw the whole city into alarm, as the people thought that his extreme haste and bustle must portend the approach of an enemy or some other calamity. But when he was admitted to the presence of the prince, all he had to say was, that he had hurried to inform him that he could not go to Samarcand so quickly. The prince was very angry with him for making all this disturbance about nothing, and threatened to punish him. 
The uses of chastisements.He said, “Alms of mercy repel calamity, 4Alms cure thy sickness, O son’Tis not charitable to burn up the poor,Or to put out the eyes of the meek.”The prince replied, “Kindness is good in its place,Provided you do kindness in its proper place.If at chess you put the king in the rook’s placeThat is wrong; and so if you put the knight in the king’s,The law prescribes both rewards and chastisements.The king’s place is the throne, the horse’s the gate.What is justice but putting each in his place?What injustice but putting each in what is not his place?Nothing is vain of all that God has created,Whether vengeance or mercy, or plain dealing or snares.Not one of all these is good absolutely,Nor is any one of them absolutely bad.Each is harmful or beneficial according to its place,Wherefore knowledge of these points is proper and useful.Ah! many are the chastisements sent to the poorWhich are more beneficial to him than bread and sweets;Because sweets out of season excite biliousness,While blows make him pure from impurity.Strike the poor man timely blows,Which may save him from being beheaded later.” 
The peasant, in reply, urged the prince not to be over hasty in punishing him, but to take counsel with suitable advisers, as enjoined in various texts, 5 and in the Hadis prohibiting monkery, and warned him that if he shunned the advice and society of his equals he would assuredly be led astray by wretched companions. 6 In illustration of this a story is told of a mouse who conceived a great affection for a frog living in a neighboring pond. 7 That he might be able to communicate with his friend at all times, he fastened a string to the frog’s leg, and the other end of it to his own. The proverb says, “Occasional intermission of visits augments love,” 8 but ardent lovers desire to be in communication with the object of their love without intermission. The frog was at first unwilling to enter into such close relations with an animal of another species, but at last allowed himself to be persuaded to do so, against his better judgment. Shortly afterwards a raven swooped down on the mouse and carried him off, and the frog, being fastened to the mouse, was dragged off and destroyed along with it. The raven’s friends said to him, “How is it you managed to catch an animal that lives in the water?” and he replied, “Because it was so silly as to consort with one of another species that lived on dry land.” 
Comparison of the body to the mouse, and the soul to the frog.The two friends discussed the matter long,And after discussion this plan was settled,That they should fetch a long string,By means of which to communicate with one another.The mouse said, “One end must be tied to your leg,And the other end to the leg of me, your double,That by this contrivance we two may be united,And be mingled together like soul and body.”Body is like a string tied to sod’s foot,That string drags soul down to earth.The soul is the frog in the water of ecstatic bliss;Escaping from the mouse of the body, it is in bliss.The mouse of the body drags it back with that string;Ah! what sorrow it tastes through being dragged backIf it were not dragged down by that insolent mouse,The frog would remain at peace in its water.On the last day, when you shall awake from sleep,You will learn the rest of this from the Sun of truth! 
In illustration of the thesis that the sense which perceives the unseen and spiritual world is superior to the other senses, and is exempt from death and decay, the poet tells an anecdote of Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni and some robbers. One night, when walking about the city alone, he fell in with a band of robbers. He told them he was one of them, and proposed that each should tell his own special talent. Accordingly one said he could hear what the dogs said when they barked; another that his sight was so good that when he saw a man at night he could recognize him without fail next day; another said his talent lay in the strength of his arms, whereby he dug holes through the walls of houses another said he could divine by his sense of smell where gold was hidden; another said his wrist was so strong that he could throw a rope farther than any one. At last it came to the turn of the king, and he told them that his talent lay in his beard, for when he wagged it he could deliver criminals from the executioner. The robbers then went to the king’s palace, and, each of them co-operating by the exercise of his peculiar talent, they broke into it, and plundered a large sum of money. The king, after witnessing the burglary, withdrew from them secretly, and, having summoned his Vazir, gave orders for their apprehension. No sooner were the robbers brought before the king than the one whose talent lay in recognizing by day those whom he had seen in the darkness of night at once knew him, and said to the others, “This is the man who said his talent lay in his beard!” Thus the only one whose talent profited him at the time of need was he who could recognize by day what he had previously seen by night; for he appealed to the king to exercise his talent of deliverance, and the king listened to his entreaty, and delivered him from the executioner. 
He whose eyes discern God in the world is safe from destruction.He who, when he had once seen a person at night,Recognized him without fail when he saw him by day,Saw the king upon the throne, and straightway cried,“This was he who accompanied us on our nightly walk;This is he whose beard possessed such rare talent;Our arrest is due to his sagacity.”He added, “‘Yea, he was with you,’ 9 this great king;He beheld our actions and heard our secrets.My eyes guided me to recognize that king at night,And dwelt lovingly on his face, like the moon at night.Now, therefore, I will implore his grace for myself,For he will never avert his face from him that knew him.”Know the eye of the ‘ Knower is a safeguard in both worlds,For therein ye will find a very Bahram to aid you.For this cause Muhammad was the intercessor for faults,Because his eye ‘did not wander’ 10 from the King of kings.In the night of this world, when the sun is hidden,He beheld God, and placed his hopes on Him.His eyes were anointed with the words, ‘ We opened thy heart,’ 11He beheld what Gabriel himself had not power to see.” 12The story of the frog is concluded by the lamentations of the frog over his folly in consorting with an animal of a different genus to his own, on which Reason warns him that homogeneity lies in spirit, not in outward form; and this is illustrated by an anecdote of a man named ‘Abdu’l Ghaus, who was the son of a fairy mother, and consequently homogeneous with the fairies, though only an ordinary man to outward appearance. 
NOTES: 
Koran ii. 182.2. Koran ii. 56.3. Samiri, the maker of the golden calf. Qarun Korah.4. Freytag Arabum Proverbia, iii. 277.5. Koran lxvii. 22, iii. 155, xlii. 36.6. Koran xliii. 37.7. Anvari Suhaili, Chap. vii. Story III.8. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, i. 287.9. Koran lvii. 4.10. Koran liii. 17.11. Koran xciv. 1.12. Gulshan i Raz, I. 120. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY VIII. The Man who received a Pension from the Prefect of Tabriz. 
These reflections on the nothingness of outward form compared to spirit lead the poet to the corollary that often men whose outward forms are buried in the grave are greater benefactors to the poor and helpless than men still living in the body. This is illustrated by the story of the man who was maintained by the Prefect of Tabriz. This man incurred heavy debts on the credit of his pension, even as the Imam Ja’far Sadiq was able to capture a strong fort single-handed through the power of God assisting him. When the creditors became pressing the man journeyed to Tabriz to seek further aid; but on arriving there he found the Prefect was dead. On learning this he was much cast down, but eventually recognized that he had erred in looking to a creature instead of his Creator for aid, according to the text, “The infidels equalize others with their Lord.” 1 This obliquity of spiritual sight, causing him to see a mere human benefactor, where the real benefactor was God alone, is illustrated by anecdotes of a man buying bread at Kashan, of Sultan Khwarazm Shah deluded into disliking a fine horse by the interested advice of his Vazir, and of Joseph, who when imprisoned by Pharaoh was induced to trust for deliverance to the intercession of the chief butler rather than to God alone, for which cause “he remained several years in prison.” 2 A charitable person of Tabriz endeavoured to raise funds for the poor man, and appealed to the citizens to aid him, but only succeeded in collecting a very small sum. He then visited the Prefect’s tomb, and implored assistance from him; and the same night the Prefect appeared to him in a dream, and gave him directions where to find a great treasure, and directed him to make over this treasure to the poor man. Thus the dead Prefect proved a more liberal benefactor than the citizens of Tabriz who were still living. 
The poor man’s regrets for having placed his trust in man and not in God.When he recovered himself he said, “O God,I have sinned in looking for aid to a creature!Although the Prefect showed great liberality,It was in no wise equal to Thy bounty.He gave me a cap, but Thou my head full of sense;He gave me a garment, but Thou my tall form.He gave me gold, but Thou my hand which counts it;He gave me a horse, but Thou my reason to guide it;He gave me a lamp, but Thou my lucid eyes;He gave me sweetmeats, but Thou my appetite for them;He gave me a pension, but Thou my life and being;His gift was gold, but Thine true blessings;He gave me a house, but Thou heaven and earth;In Thy house he and a hundred like him are nourished.The gold was of Thy providing, he did not create it;The bread of Thy providing, and furnished to him by Thee.Thou also didst give him his liberality,For thereby Thou didst augment his happiness.I made him my Qibla, and directed my prayers to him;I turned away my eyes from Thee, the Qibla-maker!Where was he when the Supreme Dispenser of faithSowed reason in the water and clay of man,And drew forth from Not-being this heavenly dome,And spread out the carpet of the earth?Of the stars He made torches to illumine the sky,And of the four elements locks with keys (of reason).Ah! many are the buildings visible and invisibleWhich God has made between heaven’s dome and earth.Man is the astrolabe of those exalted attributes,The attribute of man is to manifest God’s signs.Whatever is seen in man is the reflection of God,Even as the reflection of the moon in water.”Say not two, know not two, call not on two!Know the slave is obliterated in his lord!So the lord is obliterated in God that created himYea, lost and dead and buried in his Creator!When you regard this lord as separate from God,You annihilate at once text and paraphrase.With eyes and heart look beyond mere water and clay,God alone is the Qibla; regard not two Qiblas!If you regard two you lose the benefit of both;A spark falls on the tinder and the tinder vanishes!Joseph kept in prison a long time for having placed his hopes of release in man and not in God.In like manner Joseph, in the prison,With humble and earnest supplicationsBegged aid, saying, “When you are released,And are occupied with your ministrations to the king,Remember me, and entreat the kingTo release rue too from this prison.”How can one prisoner fettered in the snareProcure release for a fellow prisoner?The people of the world are all prisoners,Awaiting death on the stake of annihilation;Except one or two rare exceptions,Whose bodies are in prison but their souls in heaven.Afterwards, because Joseph had looked to man for aid,He remained in prison for many years.The Devil caused the man to forget Joseph,And blotted Joseph’s words from his remembrance;And on account of this fault of that holy manGod left him in the prison for many years. 
NOTES: 
Koran vi. 1.2. Koran xii. 42.3. Koran xii. 42. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





STORY IX. The King and his Three Sons. 
A certain king had three sons, who were the light of his eyes, and, as it were, a fountain whence the palm tree of his heart drank the water of bliss. One day he called his sons before him and commanded them to travel through his realm, and to inspect the behavior of the governors and the state of the administration; and he strictly charged them not to go near a particular fort which he named. But, according to the saying, “Man hankers after what is forbidden,” the three princes disobeyed their father, and, before going anywhere else, proceeded to visit this fort. The result was, that they fell into calamities, and had occasion to repeat the text, “Had we but hearkened or understood, we had not been among the dwellers in the flame.” 1 The fort was full of pictures, images and forms, and amongst them was a portrait of a beautiful damsel, the daughter of the King of China, which made such a deep impression on the three princes that they all became distracted with love and determined to journey to the court of the King of China and sue for the hand of his daughter. 
The significance of forms. 2Be not intoxicated with these goblets of forms,Lest you become a maker and worshipper of idols.Pass by these cups full of forms, linger not;There is wine in the cups, but it proceeds not from them.Look to the Giver of the wine with open mouth;When His wine comes, is not cup too small to hold it?O Adam, seek the reality of my love,Quit the mere husk and form of the wheat.When sand was made meal for “The Friend of God,” 3Know, O master, the form of wheat was dispensed with.Form proceeds from the world that is without form,Even as smoke arises from fire.The Divine art without form designs forms (ideals), 4Those forms fashion bodies with senses and instruments.Whatever the form, it fashions in its own likenessThose bodies either to good or to evil.If the form be blessing, the man is thankful;If it be suffering, he is patient;If it be cherishing, he is cheerful;If it be bruising, he is full of lamentation!Since all these forms are slaves of Him without form,Why do they deny their Lord and Master?They exist only through Him that is without form;What, then, means their disavowal of their Sustainer?This very denial of Him proceeds from Him,This act is naught but a reflection from Himself!The forms of the walls and roofs of housesKnow to be shadows of the architect’s thought;Although stones and planks and bricksFind no entrance into the sanctuary of thought,Verily the Absolute Agent is without form,Form is only a tool in His hands.Sometimes that Formless One of His mercyShows His face to His forms from behind the veil of Not-being,That every form may derive aid therefrom,From its perfect beauty and power.Again, when that Formless One hides His face,Those forms set forth their needs.If one form sought perfection from another form,That would be the height of error.Why then, O simpleton, do you set forth your needsTo one who is as needy as yourself?Since forms are slaves, apply them not to God,Seek not to use a form as a similitude of God. 5Seek Him with humbleness and self-abasement,For thought yields naught but forms of thought.Still, if you are unable to dispense with forms,Those occurring independently of your thought are best. 6The “Truth,” which is our real self, lies hidden within our phenomenal and visible self, and the Prophets reveal it to us.“Now have we seen what the king saw at the first,When that Incomparable One adjured us.”The prophets have many claims to our gratitude,Because they forewarn us of our ultimate lot,Saying, “What ye sow will yield only thorns;If ye fly that way, ye will fly astray.Take seed of us to yield you a good harvest,Fly with our wings to hit the mark with your arrow.Now ye know not the truth and nature of the ‘Truth,’ 7But at the last ye will cry, ‘That was the “Truth.”’The Truth is yourself, but not your mere bodily self,Your real self is higher than ‘you’ and ‘me.’This visible ‘you’ which you fancy to be yourselfIs limited in place, the real ‘you’ is not limited.Why, O pearl, linger you trembling in your shell?Esteem not yourself mere sugar-cane, but real sugar.This outward ‘you’ is foreign to your real ‘ you;’Cling to your real self, quit this dual self.Your last self attains to your first (real) selfOnly through your attending earnestly to that union.Your real self lies hid beneath your outward self,For ‘I am the servant of him who looks into himself.’ “ 8“What a youth sees only when reflected in a glass,Our wise old fathers saw long ago though hid in stones.But we disobeyed the advice of our father,And rebelled against his affectionate counsels.We made light of the king’s exhortations,And slighted his matchless intimations.Now we have all fallen into the ditch,Wounded and crushed in this fatal struggle.We relied on our own reason and discernment,And for that cause have fallen into this calamity.We fancied ourselves free from defects of sight,Even as those affected by color-blindness.Now at last our hidden disease has been revealed,After we have been involved in these calamities.”“The shadow of a guide is better than directions to God,To be satisfied is better than a hundred nice dishes.A seeing eye is better than a hundred walking-sticks,Eye discerns jewels from mere pebbles.” 
The princes ascertained the name of the lady depicted in the fort from an old Shaikh, who warned them of the perils they would encounter on their journey to China, and told them that the King of China would not bestow his favor on those who tried to gain it by tricks and clever stratagems, but solely on those who were prepared to yield up their lives to him, according to the saying, “Die before you die.” This is illustrated by an anecdote of a Chief of Bokhara, who made it a rule never to bestow his bounty on beggars who asked for it, but only on those who awaited his pleasure in silence. A certain Faqir tried many stratagems to evade this rule, but his craft was at once seen through by the Chief, and turned to his own confusion. The thesis that the unbought free grace of God is superior to any blessing obtainable by human exertion and contrivance is further illustrated by an absurd anecdote of two youths, one of whom trusted for protection to his own contrivance, and found it a broken reed. The Prophet said, “Two there are who are never satisfied the lover of the world and the lover of knowledge;” and he who loves knowledge will continue to trust in his knowledge, in spite of all exhortations and experience. But the eldest prince advised his brothers to risk the perils and persevere in the journey, reminding them that “Patience is the key of joy.” Accordingly they abandoned their country and their parents, like Ibrahim Adham, who renounced the throne of Balkh, and like the old Arabian king Amru’l Qais, who fled from the pursuit of his female adorers to seek the Spiritual Beloved in a far country. 
How the princes discoursed with one another in figurative language concerning their beloved mistress.They told their secrets to one another in dark sayings,Speaking beneath their breath in fear and trembling.None but God was privy to their secrets,None but Heaven was partner in their sighs.Yea, they used technical expressions one to another,And possessed intelligence to extract the sense.The vulgar learn the words of this “language of birds,” 9And make boast of their mastery thereof;But these words are only the outward form of the language,The “raw” man is ignorant of the birds’ meaning.He is the true Solomon who knows the birds’ language,A demon, though he usurp his kingdom, is quite another.The demon has taken upon him the form of Solomon,His knowledge is fraud, not “what we have been taught.”When Solomon was blessed with inspiration from God,He learned birds’ language from “what we were taught.”But thou art only a bird of the air; understand thenThat thou hast never seen the true spiritual birds!The nest of the Simurgh is beyond Mount Qaf, 10Not every thought can attain thereto;Save thoughts which catch a glimpse thereof,And after the vision are again shut off.Yet not all shut off, rather intermitted for a wise end,For the blessing abides, though shut off and hidden!In order to preserve that body which is as a soul,The Sun is veiled for a while behind a cloud;In order not to melt that soul-like body,The Sun withdraws itself as from ice.For thy soul’s sake seek counsel of these inspired ones. 11Ah! rob not their words of their technical meanings!Zulaikha applied to Yusuf the names of all things,Beginning with wild rue and ending with frankincense.She veiled his name under all other names,And imparted her secret meaning to her confidants.When she said, “The wax is melted by the fire,”She meant, “My lover is wroth with me.”So when she said, “See, the moon is risen!”Or, “Lo! the willow-bough is putting forth leaves;”Or if she said, “The leaves quiver in the wind,”Or, “The wild rue yields perfume as it burns;”Or if she said, “The rose tells her tale to the Bulbul,”Or, “The king sings his love-strain;”Or if she said, “Ah! what a blessed lot!”Or, “Who hath disturbed my heart’s repose?”Or if she said, “The water-carrier hath brought water,”Or, “Lo! the sun emerges from the clouds;”Or if she said, “Last night the victuals were boiled,”Or, “The food was perfectly cooked;”Or if she said, “My bread is without savor”Or, “The heavens are revolving the wrong way;Or if she said, “My head aches with pain,”Or, “My headache is now relieved;”If she gave thanks, ’twas for being united to Yusuf;If she wailed, ’twas that she was separated from him.Though she gave vent to thousands of names,Her meaning and purport was only Yusuf;Was she an hungred, when she pronounced his name,She became filled and cheered by his nourishment.Her thirst was quenched by Yusuf’s name,His name was spiritual water to her soul.Was she in pain, by pronouncing his mighty nameAt once her pain was turned into joy.In the cold it was a warm garment;Her lover’s name accomplished all this through love.Strangers may pronounce the “pure name” of God,Yet it effects no such marvels, for they lack love.All that ‘Isa accomplished by the name of Jehovah,Zulaikha attained through the name “Yusuf.”When the soul is intimately united with God,To name the one is the same as naming the other.Zulaikha was empty of self and filled with love of Yusuf,And there flowed out of her jar what it contained.The scent of the saffron of union made her smile,The stench of the onion of separation made her weep.Each to have in his heart a hundred meanings,Such is not the creed of true love and devotion.“The Friend” is to the lover as day to the sun,The material sun is a veil over the face of the real day.Whoso distinguishes not the veil from “The Friend’s” faceIs a worshipper of the sun; of such a one beware!“The Friend” is the real day, and daily food of lovers,The heart and the heart’s torment of His lovers. 
After enduring many toils and misfortunes the three princes at last arrived in the metropolis of China, and thereupon the eldest prince expressed his intention of presenting himself before the king, as he could wait no longer. His brothers tried to dissuade him from risking his life, pointing out that if he acted on blind impulse and vain conceit he would surely go astray, for “a conceit hath naught of truth;” 12 and they further urged him to listen to the counsels of the Pir, or Spiritual Director. But the eldest brother refused to be dissuaded from his purpose, saying he would no longer hide his passion for his beloved, like one who beats a drum under a blanket, but would proclaim it openly, and take the risk of whatever might ensue. He added that he was convinced that he should obtain his desire in some way or other, if not in the way that he expected; according to the text, “Whoso feareth God, to him will he grant a prosperous issue, and will provide for him in a way he reckoned not.” 13 Seekers after God fancy that He is far from them, and that they must travel far to reach Him; but these are both erroneous suppositions; and just as arithmeticians work out true answers to their problems by the “Method of Errors,” 14 so must the seekers of God from these errors work out the conviction that God is very nigh to them that call upon Him faithfully. To illustrate this an anecdote is told of a man of Baghdad who was in great distress, and who, after calling on God for aid, dreamt that a great treasure lay hid in a certain spot in Egypt. He accordingly journeyed to Egypt, and there fell into the hands of the patrol, who arrested him, and beat him severely on suspicion of being a thief. Calling to mind the proverb that “falsehood is a mischief but truth a remedy,” 15 he determined to confess the true reason of his coming to Egypt, and accordingly told them all the particulars of his dream. On hearing them they believed him, and one of them said, “You must be a fool to journey all this distance merely on the faith of a dream. I myself have many times dreamt of a treasure lying hid in a certain spot in Baghdad, but was never foolish enough to go there.” Now the spot in Baghdad named by this person was none other than the house of the poor man of Baghdad, and he straightway returned home, and there found the treasure. And he gave thanks, and recognized how “God causes ease to follow troubles,” 16 and how “Men hate what is good for them,” 17 and how God delays the answer to prayer, and allows men to remain poor and hungry for a season, in order to make them call upon Him, even as the Prophet said, “My servant is a lute which sounds best when it is empty.”Why the answer to prayer is delayed.Ah! many earnest suppliants wail forth prayers,Till the smoke of their wailing rises to heaven;Yea, the perfume of the incense of sinners’ groansMounts up above the lofty roof of heaven.Then the angels supplicate God, saying,“O Thou that hearest prayer and relievest pain,Thy faithful slave is bowing down before Thee.He knows of none on whom to rely save Thee;Thou bestowest favors on the helpless.Every suppliant obtains his desire from Thee.”God makes answer, “The delay in granting his prayerIs intended to benefit him, not to harm him.His pressing need draws him from his negligence to me;Yea, drags him by the hair into my courts.If I at once remove his need he will go away,And will be destroyed in his idle sports.Though he is wailing with heartfelt cry of ‘O Aider!’Bid him wail on with broken heart and contrite breast.His voice sounds sweet in my ears,And his wailing and cries of’ O God!’In this way by supplication and lamentationHe prevails with me altogether.”It is on account of their sweet voicesThat choice parrots and nightingales are jailed in cages.Ugly owls and crows 18 are never jailed in cages;Such a thing was never heard of in history.The disappointments of the pious, be sure,Are appointed for this wise purpose. 
The eldest brother then delayed no longer, but rushed into the presence of the King and kissed his feet. The King, like a good shepherd, was well aware of the troubles and cravings of his sheep. He knew that the prince had abjured earthly rank and dignity through love for his daughter, even as a Sufi casts away his robe when overpowered by ecstatic rapture. The only reason why the prince had lagged behind in the race and not presented himself to the King before was that hitherto he had lacked the “inner eye” or spiritual sense which discerns spiritual verities, and had been consequently blind to the King’s perfections. They who lack this inner spiritual sense can no more appreciate spiritual pleasures than a man lacking the sense of smell can enjoy the perfume of flowers, or a eunuch the society of fair women. But his eyes had now been opened by the King’s grace, and he had escaped from the bondage of worldly lusts and illusions, and, taught by experience, had resolved never again to be led captive by them. 
This is illustrated by the anecdote of the Qazi who was beguiled by the wife of a dwarf. The dwarf and his wife were very poor, and one day the dwarf said to his wife, “God has given you arched brows and arrowy glances and all manner of witchery; go and ensnare some rich man, so that we may extract money from him!” So the woman went to the court of the Qazi, pretending to have a grievance; and when she saw the Qazi she beguiled him, and induced him to pay her a visit at night. While the Qazi was sitting with her the dwarf returned home and knocked violently at the door, and the Qazi, in a great fright, hid himself in a large chest. The dwarf at once fetched a porter, and told him to take the chest to the bazar and sell it. On the way to the bazar the Qazi cried out to the porter to fetch the Deputy; and when the Deputy came he redeemed the chest for one hundred Dinars, and thus the Qazi escaped. Next year the woman went to the court and tried to seduce the Qazi a second time; but he said, “Begone; I have escaped from your toils once, and will not fall into them again. The action of the Deputy in freeing the Qazi reminds the poet of the saying of the Prophet, “Of him, of whom I am the master, ‘Ali also is master,” and is therefore able to free him from slavery. 
The eldest prince at last fell sick of hope deferred, and gave up the ghost. But though he failed to obtain the King’s daughter, the object of his earthly attachment, he obtained union with the King, the real spiritual object of his love, and the eternal fruition of dwelling in Him.The joys of union with the Spiritual Beloved are inexpressible in speech.In short, the King cherished him lovingly,And he like a moon waned in that sun.That waning of lovers makes them wax stronger,Just as the moon waxes brighter after waning.Ordinary sick persons crave a remedy for sicknessBut the lovesick one cries, “Increase my waning!I have never tasted wine sweeter than this poison,No health can be sweeter than this sickness!No devotion is better than this sin (of love),Years are as a moment compared to this moment!”Long time he dwelt with the King in this manner,With burning heart, as a lively sacrifice.Thus his life passed, yet he gained not the union He wished.Patient waiting consumed him, his soul could not bear it;He dragged on life with pain and gnashing of teeth.At last life ended before he had attained his desire.The form of his earthly Beloved was hidden from him;He departed, and found union with his Spiritual Beloved.Then he said, “Though she lacks clothes of silk and wool,’Tis sweeter to embrace her without those veils.I have become naked of the body and its illusions,I am admitted into the most intimate union.”The story admits of being told up to this point,Bat what follows is hidden and inexpressible in words.If you should speak and try a hundred ways to express it,’Tis useless; the mystery becomes no clearer.You can ride on saddle and horse up to the sea-coast,But then you must use a horse of wood (i.e., a boat).A horse of wood is useless on dry land,It is the special conveyance of voyagers by sea.Silence is this horse of wood,Silence is the guide and support of men at sea.This Silence which causes you annoyanceIs uttering cries of love audible to the spiritual.You say, “How strange the spiritual man is silent!”He answers, “How strange you have no ears!Though I utter cries, you hear them not;Sensual ears, however sharp, are deaf to my cries.”The spiritual man, as it were, cries in his sleep,Uttering thousands of words of comfort;While the carnal man at his side hears nothing at all,For he is asleep, and deaf to the other’s voice.But the perfect spiritualist who has broken his boatPlunges into the sea as a fish of the sea (of Truth).He is then neither silent nor speaking, but a mystery.No words are available to express his condition.That marvelous one is in neither of these states’Twould be irreverent to explain his state more fully.These illustrations are weak and inappropriate,But no fitter ones are obtainable from sensible objects. 
When the eldest prince died, the youngest was sick and could not come; but the second brother came to the court to attend his funeral. There the King observed him, and took pity on him and entreated him kindly. He instilled into him spiritual knowledge of the verities hidden beneath phenomenal objects, and conveyed to him as deep a perception of spiritual truths as is not gained by a Sufi after years of fasting and retirement from the world. It is a fact, that when the pure spirit escapes from the bonds of the body, God gives it sight to behold the things of the spirit. The logician denies the possibility of this divine illumination of the heart, but he is confuted by the Prophet, who swore “by the star” that the Koran was revealed to him by divine illumination. 19 Those who cleave to their heresy (Bid’at) and obstinate unbelief are like to incur the punishment inflected on the tribe of ‘Ad for disbelieving the Prophet Hud. 20 Earthly forms are only shadows of the Sun of the Truth, a cradle for babes, but too small to hold those who have grown to spiritual manhood. When the prince was thus nourished by the spiritual food given him by the King, which was such as the angels of heaven subsist upon, not the unspiritual food of Christians and those who give partners to God, he began to be puffed up with self-conceit, and forgot what he owed to the King, and rebelled against him. The King was cut to the heart by his ingratitude, which exactly resembled that of Nimrod. When Nimrod was an infant he was taken by his mother to sea, and the ship being wrecked, all that were in it perished, save only the infant Nimrod who was saved through the pity of Izrail, the Angel of Death. God spared him, and nurtured him without the aid of mother or nurse; but when he grew up he proved ungrateful, and was puffed up with self-conceit and egotism, and showed enmity against God and Abraham His servant. When the prince found himself cast off by the King he came to himself, and repented and humbled himself with deep contrition. The King then pardoned him; but his doom had already been decreed by God, and he was slain by the King he had injured, acknowledging the King’s goodness to him with his latest breath. 
The death of the second prince.In short, the vengeance of That Jealous One (God)After one year bore him to the grave.When the King awoke out of his trance to consciousness,His Mars-like eyes shed tears of blood.When that incomparable one looked into his quiver,He saw that one of his arrow-shafts was missing.He cried to God, “What has become of my arrow?”God answered, “Thy arrow is fixed in his throat!”That King, bountiful as the sea, had pardoned him;Nevertheless his arrow had dealt him a mortal wound.He was slain, and cried out with his last breath,“The King is all in all, my slayer and my savior.If he is not both these, he is not all in all;Nay, he is both my slayer and my mourner!”That expiring martyr also gave thanks,That the King had smitten his body, not his spirit;For the visible body must perforce perish,Ere the spirit can live in happiness for evermore.Though he incurred chastisement, it affected his body only,And as a friend he now goes, free of pain, to his Friend.Thus at first he clung to the King’s stirrup,But at last went his way guided by perfect sight.Finally, the youngest brother, who was the weakest of all, succeeded where his brothers had failed, and obtained his earthly mistress, the king’s daughter, as his bride, and the Spiritual Beloved as well.Here the Masnavi breaks off; but, according to the Bulaq edition, the following conclusion was supplied by Jalalu-’d-Din’s son, Bahau-’d-Din Sultan Valad:Part of the story remains untold; it was retainedIn his mind and was not disclosed.The story of the princes remains unfinished,The pearl of the third brother remains unstrung.Here speech, like a camel, breaks down on its road;I will say no more, but guard my tongue from speech.The rest is told without aid of tongueTo the heart of him whose spirit is alive. 
NOTES: 
Koran lxvii. 10.2. Surat, or “form,” means picture, image, outward appearance as opposed to reality, conception or “form of thought,” the “architypes” or “ideas” in the Divine mind, “the Substantial forms” of the Realist philosophy. Here the poet runs through nearly all these meanings.3. Sale’s Koran, , note.4. i.e., the architypes in the “Intellectual Presence” or “world of command,” which are afterwards set forth in the “world of creation or sensible objects.5. See Koran xlii. 9.6. i.e., the similitudes used in the Koran.7. “The Truth,” Al Haqq, the Divine Noumenon.8. See Gulshan i Raz, Answer III., and the Hadis, “Whoso knows himself knows his Lord.”9. Koran xxvii. 16.10. Simurgh, “Oiseau extraordinaire qui reside au Caucase,” as M. Garcin de Tassy calls it, means “thirty birds” (Si murgh), and is used as a type of the Divine Unity which embraces all plurality.11. i.e., the prophets and saints.12. Koran x. 37.13. Koran lxv. 2.14. i.e., “The Rule of Position.”Khulasat ul Hisab, Book iv.15. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, ii. 379.16. Koran ii. 213.17. Koran lxv. 7.18. i.e., hardened sinners like Pharaoh.19. Koran liii. 1.20. Koran xlvi. 20. 
Note on Apocryphal Supplements to the Masnavi.In the Lucknow edition there follows an epilogue written by Muhammad Ilahi Bakhsh, giving a continuation of the story of the third brother, but nothing of the kind is found in any of the other editions.The Bulaq edition adds a so-called Book VII., but this is known to be a comparatively recent forgery. Haji Khalfa says: “It is notorious that the Masnavi is contained in six books, but a seventh book has made its appearance, put forth by Ismail Dadah, the commentator. He also wrote a commentary on it, and therein replied with eloquence and strenuousness to those who denied its genuineness. He says in his commentary that when he came to write out his fifth volume in the year 1035 A.H., he met with Book VII. in a copy of the Masnavi dated 814 A.H. He bought it and read it through, and was satisfied that it was undoubtedly a composition of the author of the Masnavi. But the other Darveshes of the Maulavi order denied the genuineness of the Seventh Book.” 1The contents of this Seventh Book consist of comments on various texts and traditions, illustrated by stories of no interest. They have nothing in common with the Epilogue of Muhammad Ilahi Bakhsh, found in the Lucknow edition. 
NOTES: 
Haji Khalfa, v. 377. Ismai1 was a Darvesh of the Maulavi order, surnamed Anguravi, from his native place Anguri, in Anatolia. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





The Diwan-e Shams-e Tabrizi

Konya, a city in the Central Anatolia Region of Turkey, the seventh most populous city in the country. Rumi spent the last fifty years of his life in Konya and his tomb is located in the city.






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





THE DIWAN-E SHAMS-E TABRIZI
 
Rumi’s other great poetic work is The Diwan-e Shams-e Tabrizi — a collection of lyric poems, containing more than 40,000 verses and written in the New Persian language. It is considered one of the greatest works of Persian literature, providing verses in several different styles of Eastern-Islamic poetry, including odes, eulogies and quatrains. Although most of the poems are composed in New Persian, some are written in Arabic and a small number survive in a Persian/Greek and Persian/Turkish compound format. 
The Diwan-e Shams-e Tabrizi is named in honour of Rumi’s spiritual teacher and friend Shams Tabrizi. Tradition holds that Shams taught Rumi in seclusion in Konya for a period of forty days, before fleeing for Damascus. As the years passed, Rumi attributed more and more of his own poetry to Shams as a sign of love for his departed friend and master. In Rumi’s poetry Shams becomes a guide of Allah’s (Creator) love for mankind; Shams was a sun (“Shams” means “Sun” in Arabic) shining the Light of Sun as guide for the right path evading darkness for Rumi heart, mind and body on earth. The source of Shams’ teachings was the knowledge of Ali ibn Abu Talib, who is also called the father of Sufism.






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series






A page of the Diwan-e Shams-e Tabrizi dating to c. 1503






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series






Tomb of Shams Tabrizi






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





REYNOLD A. NICHOLSON TRANSLATION
 
Selections from ‘The Diwan-E Shams-E Tabrizi’ 





Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





CONTENTS 
I.
II.
III.
IV.
V.
VI.
VII.
VIII.
IX.
X.
XI.
XII.
XIII.
XIV.
XV.
XVI.
XVII.
XVIII.
XIX.
XX.
XXI.
XXII.
XXIII.
XXIV.
XXV.
XXVI.
XXVII.
XXVIII.
XXIX.
XXX.
XXXI.
XXXII.
XXXIII.
XXXIV.
XXXV.
XXXVI.
XXXVII.
XXXVIII.
XXXIX.
XL.
XLI.
XLII.
XLIII.
XLIV.
XLV.
XLVI.
XLVII.
XLVIII.
 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





I. 
If thou art Love’s lover and seekest Love,Take a keen poniard and cut the throat of bashfulness.Know that reputation is a great hindrance in the path;This saying is disinterested: receive it with pure mind.Wherefore did that madman work madness in a thousand forms,That chosen wild one display a thousand wiles?Now he rent robe, and now sped o’er mountain,Now sipped poison, and now chose death.Since the spider seized prey so large,Behold what the snare of My Lord the Supreme will do!Since the love of Laila’s face had such value,How will it be with “He took His servant by night”?Hast thou not seen the divans of Waisa and Ramin?Hast thou not read the tales of Wamiq and ‘Adra?Thou gatherest up thy garment lest the water should wet it:Needs must thou plunge a thousand times in the sea.Love’s way is all lowliness and drunkenness:For the torrent runs down: how should it run upward?Thou wilt be as the bezel in the ring of loversIf thou art the bezel’s thrall, O master.Even as this earth to the sky is thrall,Even as the body to the spirit is thrall.Come, say, what did the earth lose by this connexion?What kindnesses has not the reason done to the limbs?It behoves not, son, to beat a drum under a quilt;Plant, like brave men, thy banner in the midst of the desert.Hark with the soul’s ear to the sounds innumerableIn the hollow of the green dome, rising from lovers’ passionate cry.When the strings of thy robe are loosed by the intoxication of love,Behold heaven’s triumph and Orion’s bewilderment!How the world, high and low, is troubledBy love, which is purified from high and low!When the sun goes up, where stayeth night?When the joy of bounty came, where lagged affliction?I am silent. Speak thou, O soul of soul of soul,From desire of whose face every atom grew articulate. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





II. 
Our desert hath no bound,Our hearts and souls have no rest.World in world has ta’en Form’s image;Which of these images is ours?When thou seest in the pathway a severed head,Which is rolling toward our field,Ask of it, ask of it, the secrets of the heart:For of it thou wilt learn our hidden mystery.How would it be, if an ear showed itself,Familiar with the tongues of our songsters?How would it be, if a bird took wing,Bearing the collar of the secret of our Solomon?What shall I say, what think? for this taleIs too high for our limited and contingent being.How keep silence, when every momentOur anguish grows more anguished?Partridge and falcon alike are flying togetherMid the air of our mountain-land;Mid an air which is the seventh atmosphere,At the zenith whereof is our Saturn.Are not the seven heavens below the empyrean?Beyond the empyrean is our revolution.What place here for aspirations toward the empyrean and the sky?Our journey is to the rose-garden of union.Leave this tale. Ask not of us,For our tale is wholly interrupted.Salahu ‘lhaq “din will declare to theeThe beauty of our Sultan, the King of kings. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





III. 
Yestereve I delivered to a star tidings for thee:‘Present,’ I said, ‘my service to that moon-like form.’I bowed, I said: ‘Bear that service to the sunWho maketh hard rocks gold by his burning.’I bared my breast, I showed it the wounds:‘Give news of me,’ I said, ‘to the Beloved whose drink is blood.’I rocked to and fro that the child, my heart, might become still;A child sleeps when one sways the cradle.Give my heart-babe milk, relieve us from its weeping,O thou that helpest every moment a hundred helpless like me.The heart’s home, first to last, is thy city of union:How long wilt thou keep in exile this heart forlorn?I speak no more, but for the sake of averting headache,O Cup-bearer, make drunken my languishing eye. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





IV. 
David said: ‘O Lord, since thou hast no need of us,Say, then, what wisdom was there in creating the two worlds? ‘God said to him: ‘O temporal man, I was a hidden treasure;I sought that that treasure of loving kindness and bounty should be revealed.I displayed a mirror — its face the heart, its back the world — Its back is better than its face — if the face is unknown to thee.’When straw is mixed with clay, how should the mirror be successful?When you part the straw from the clay, the mirror becomes clear.Grape-juice does not turn to wine, unless it ferment awhile in the jar;Would you have your heart grow bright, you must take a little trouble.The soul which issued forth from the body — my king saith to it:‘Thou art come even as thou wentest: where are the traces of my benefactions?’Tis notorious that copper by alchemy becomes gold:Our copper has been transmuted by this rare alchemy.From God’s grace this sun wants no crown or robe:He is cap to a hundred bald men and cloak to ten naked.Child, Jesus sate oh an ass for humility’s sake:How else should the zephyr ride on the back of an ass?O spirit, make thy head in search and seeking like the water of a stream,And O reason, to gain eternal life tread everlastingly the way of death.Keep God in remembrance till self is forgotten,That you may be lost in the Called, without distraction of caller and call. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





V. 
A garden — may its rose be in flower to Resurrection!An idol — may the two worlds be scattered o’er his beauty!The prince of the fair goes proudly forth to the chase at morning;May our hearts fall a prey to the arrow of his glance!From his eye what messages are passing continually to mine!May my eyes be gladdened and filled with intoxication by his message!I broke an ascetic’s door: with a prayer he banned me,Saying, ‘Go, may all thy life be without peace!’No peace, no heart is left me, on account of his prayer, by the FriendWho thirsts for our blood — may God befriend him!My body is like the moon which is melting for love,My heart like Zuhra’s lute — may its strings be broken!Look not on the moon’s waning nor on Zuhra’s broken state;Behold the sweetness of his affliction — may it wax a thousandfold!What a bride is in the soul! By the reflection of her faceMay the world be freshened and coloured like the hands of the newly-married!Look not on the fleshly cheek which corrupts and decays;Look on the spiritual cheek — may it be sweet and agreeable!The dark body resembles a raven, and the body’s world winter;Oh, in spite of these two unpleasants may there be eternal spring!For these two unpleasants subsist by the four elements:May the subsistence of thy servants depend on something other than these four! 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





VI. 
O thou who art my soul’s comfort in the season of sorrow,O thou who art my spirit’s treasure in the bitterness of dearth!That which the imagination has not conceived, thatwhich the understanding has not seen,Visiteth my soul from thee; hence in worship I turn toward thee.By thy grace I keep fixed on eternity my amorous gaze,Except, O king, the pomps that perish lead me astray.The favour of that one, who brings glad tidings of thee,Even without thy summons, is sweeter in mine ear than songs.In the prostrations of prayer thought of thee, O lord,IN necessary and binding on me as the seven verses.To thee belongs mercy and intercession for the sin of infidels:As regards me, thou art chief and principal of the stonyhearted.If a never-ceasing bounty should offer kingdoms,If a hidden treasure should set before me all that is,I would bend down with my soul, I would lay my face in the dust,I would say, ‘Of all these the love of such an one for me! ‘Eternal life, methinks, is the time of union,Because time, for me, hath no place there.Life is the vessels, union the clear draught in them;Without thee what does the pain of the vessels avail me?I had twenty thousand desires ere this;In passion for him not even (care of) my safety remained.By the help of his grace I am become safe, becauseThe unseen king saith to me, ‘Thou art the soul of the world.’The essence of the meaning of “He” has filled my heart and soul;“Au” cries the street-dog, and neither have I third or second.The body, at the time of union with him, paid no regard to the spirit;Tho’ incorporeal, he became visible unto me.I aged with his affliction, but when TabrizYou name, all my youth comes back to me. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





VII. 
That moon, which the sky ne’er saw even in dreams, has returnedAnd brought a fire no water can quench.See the body’s house, and see my soul,This made drunken and that desolate by the cup of his love.When the host of the tavern became my heart-mate,My blood turned to wine and my heart to kabab.When the eye is filled with thought of him, a voice arrives:‘Well done, O flagon, and bravo, wine!’Love’s fingers tear up, root and stem,Every house where sunbeams fall from love.When my heart saw love’s sea, of a suddenIt left me and leaped in, crying, ‘Find me.’The face of Shamsi Din, Tabriz’s glory, is the sunIn whose track the cloud-like hearts are moving. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





VIII. 
The man of God is drunken without wine,The man of God is full without meat.The man of God is distraught and bewildered,The man of God has no food or sleep.The man of God is a king ‘neath darvish-cloak,The man — of — Go is a treasure — in a ruin.The man — of — God — is — not of air — and earth,The man of — God — is — not of fire — and water.The man of — God — is — a boundless sea,The man of God rains pearls without a cloud.The man of God hath hundred moons and skies,The man of God hath hundred suns.The man of God is made wise by the Truth,The man of God is not learned from book.The man of God is beyond infidelity and religion,To the man of God right and wrong are alike.The man of God has ridden away from Not-being,The man of God is gloriously attended.The man of God is concealed, Shamsi Din;The man of God do thou seek and find! 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





IX. 
Every moment the voice of Love is coming from left and rightWe are bound for heaven: who has a mind to sight-seeing?We have been in heaven, we have been friends of the angels;Thither, sire, let us return, for that is our country.We are even higher than heaven and more than the angels;Why pass we not beyond these twain? Our goal is majesty supreme.How different a source have the world of dust and the pure substance!Tho’ we came down, let us haste back — what place is this?Young fortune is our friend, yielding up soul our business;The leader of our caravan is Mustafa, glory of the world.This gale’s sweet scent is from the curl of his tresses,This thought’s radiance is from a cheek like “by the morning bright.”By his cheek the moon was split: she endured not the sight of him;Such fortune the moon found — she that is an humble beggar.Behold a continual “cleaving of the moon” in our hearts,For why should the vision of that vision transcend thine eye?Came the billow of “Am I not?” and wrecked the body’s ship;When the ship wrecks once more is the time of union’s attainment.Mankind, like waterfowl, are sprung from the sea — the sea of soul;Risen from that sea, why should the bird make here his home?Nay, we are pearls in that sea, therein we all abide;Else, why does wave follow wave from the sea of soul?’Tis the time of union’s attainment, ’tis the time of eternity’s beauty,’Tis the time of favour and largesse, ’tis the ocean of perfect purity.The billow of largesse hath appeared, the thunder of the sea hath arrived,The mom of blessedness hath dawned. Morn? No, ’tis the light of God.Who is this pictured form, who is this monarch and this prince?Who is this aged wisdom? They are all veils.The remedy against veils is ecstasies like these,The fountain of these draughts is in your own head and eyes.In the head itself is nought, but ye have two heads;This head of clay is from earth, and that pure head from heaven.O the many pure heads scattered beneath the clay,That thou mayst know the head depends on that other head!That original head hidden, and this derived head manifest,Forasmuch as behind this world lies the infinite universe.Tie up the skin, O cup-bearer, fetch wine from our jar:The vessel of perceptions is straiter than a strait pass.From Tabriz-ward shone the Sun of Truth, and I said to him:‘Thy light is at once joined with all things and apart from all.’ 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





X. 
What pearl art thou that none possesseth the price of thee?What does the world possess that is not thy gift?Is there a worse punishment than his who lives away from thy face?Punish not thy servant tho’ he is unworthy of thee.He that is fallen amid the surge of accidentsEscapes not by swimming, since he is no friend of thine.The world has no permanence, and if it have,Deem it perishable, because it is unfamiliar with thy permanence.How happy the king that is mated by thy rook!How fair company hath he who lacks not thine!I desire continually to fling heart and soul at thy feet;Dust on the head of the soul which is not the dust of thy feet!Blessed to all birds is desire of thee;How unblest the bird that desires thee not!I will not shun thy blow, for very crudeIs the heart ne’er burned in the fire of thy affliction.To thy praise and praisers there is no end;What atom but is reeling with thy praise?Like that one of whom Nizam! tells in verse,Tyrannise not, for I cannot endure thy tyranny.O Shamsi Tabriz, beauty and glory of the horizons,What king but is a beggar of thee with heart and soul? 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XI. 
O Beloved, spiritual beauty is very fair and glorious,Rut thine own beauty and loveliness is another thing.O thou who art years describing spirit,Show one quality that is equal to his essence.Light waxes in the eye at the imagination of him,But in presence of his union it is dimmed.I stand open-mouthed in veneration of that beauty:‘God is most great’ is on my heart’s lips every moment.The heart hath gotten an eye constant in desire of thee.Oh, how that desire feeds heart and eye!’Tis slave-caressing thy love has practised;Rise, where is the heart worthy of that love?Every heart that has slept one night in thy airIs like radiant day: thereby the air is illumined.Every one that is without object is as thy disciple:His object is gained without the semblance of object.Each reprobate who has burned in this love and fallen in it,Fell into Kausar: for thy love is Kausar.From hope of union my foot comes not to earth:While I am severed from thee, my hand is on my head.Be not sorrowful, O heart, at this oppression of enemies,And think on this, that the Sweetheart is judge.If the foe is rejoiced at my sallow face,This sallow face of mine is from the red rose.Since the beauty of my Beloved is beyond description,How fat is my grief and how lean my praise!Yea, for it is a rule as regards the poor sick wretch,That while his pain is more his plaint is less.Shamsi Din shone, moon-like, from Tabriz;No, what is the very moon? for that is the moon’s face superlative. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XII. 
Every form you see has its archetype in the placeless world;If the form perished, no matter, since its original is everlasting.Every fair shape you have seen, every deep saying you have heard,Be not cast down that it perished; for that is not so.Whereas the spring-head is undying, its branch gives water continually;Since neither can cease, why are you lamenting?Conceive the Soul as a fountain, and these created things as rivers:While the fountain flows, the rivers run from it.Put grief out of your head and keep quaffing this riverwater;Do not think of the water failing; for this water is without end.From the moment you came into the world of being,A ladder was placed before you that you might escape.First you were mineral, later you turned to plant,Then you became animal: how should this be a secret to you?Afterwards you were made man, with knowledge, reason, faith;Behold the body, which is a portion of the dust-pit, how perfect it has grown!When you have travelled on from man, you will doubtless become an angel;After that you are done with this earth: your station is in heaven.Pass again even from angelhood: enter that ocean,That your drop may become a sea which is a hundred seas of ‘Oman.Leave this ‘Son.’ say ever ‘One’ with all your soul;If your body has aged, what matter, when the soul is young? 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XIII. 
‘Twere better that the spirit which wears not true love as a garmentHad not been: its being is but shame.Be drunken in love, for love is all that exists;Without the dealing of love there is no entrance to the Beloved.They say, ‘What is love?’ Say, ‘Renunciation of will.’Whoso has not escaped from will, no will hath he.The lover is a monarch: two worlds lie at his feet;The king pays no heed to what lies at his feet.’Tis love and the lover that live to all eternity;Set not thy heart on aught else: ’tis only borrowed.How long wilt thou embrace a dead beloved?Embrace the soul which is embraced by nothing.What was born of spring dies in autumn,Love’s rose-plot hath no aiding from the early spring.A thorn is the companion of the rose that comes of spring,And the wine that comes of grape-juice is not free from headache.Be not an expectant looker-on in this path;By God, there is no death worse than expectancy.Set thy heart on sterling coin, if thou be not false;Give ear to this deep saying, if thou lack an earring.Do not tremble on the steed of the body, but fare lighter on foot;God lends him wings who is not mounted on the body.Dismiss cares and be utterly clear of heart,Like the face of a mirror without image and picture.When it becomes clear of images, all images are contained in it;No man’s face is ashamed of that clear-faced one.Wouldst thou have a clear mirror, behold thyself therein.For it is not ashamed or afraid of telling the truth.Since the steel face gained this purity by discrimination,What needs the heart’s face, which has no dust?But betwixt the steel and the heart is this difference,That the one is a keeper of secrets, while the other is not. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XIV. 
He said: ‘Who is at the door?’ Said I: ‘Thy humble slave.’He said: ‘What business have you?’ Said I: ‘Lord, to greet thee.’He said: ‘How long will you push V Said I: ‘Till thou call’He said: ‘How long will you glow V Said I: ‘Till resurrection.’I laid claim to love, I took oathsThat for love I had lost sovereignty and power.He said: ‘A judge demands witness as regards a claim.’Said I: ‘Tears are my witness, paleness of face my evidence.’He said: ‘The witness is not valid; your eye is corrupt.’Said I: ‘By the majesty of thy justice they are just and clear of sin.’He said: ‘What do you intend?’ Said I: ‘Constancy and friendship.’He said: ‘What do you want of me?’ Said I: ‘Thy universal grace.’He said: ‘Who was your companion?’ Said I: ‘Thought of thee, O King.’He said: ‘Who called you here?’ Said I: ‘The odour of thy cup.’He said: ‘Where is it pleasantest? ‘Said I: ‘The Emperors palace.’He said: ‘What saw you there?’ Said I: ‘A hundred miracles.’He said: ‘Why is it desolate?’ Said I: ‘From fear of the brigand.’He said: ‘Who is the brigand?’ Said I: ‘This blame.’He said: ‘Where is it safe?’ Said I: ‘In abstinence and piety.’He said: ‘What is abstinence?’ Said I: ‘The path of salvation.’He said: ‘Where is calamity?’ Said I: ‘In the neighbourhood of thy love.’He said: ‘How fare you there V Said I: ‘In steadfastness.’I gave you a long trial, but it availed me nothing;Repentance lights on him who tests one tested already.Peace! if I should utter forth his mystic sayings,You would go beside yourself, neither door nor roof would restrain you. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XV. 
This house wherein is continually the sound of the viol,Ask of the master what house is this.What means this idol-form, if this is the house of the Ka’ba?And what means this light of God, if this is a Magian temple?In this house is a treasure which the universe is too small to hold;This house and this master is all acting and pretence.Lay no hand on the house, for this house is a talisman;Speak not with the master, for he is drunken overnight.The dust and rubbish of this house is all musk and perfume;The roof and door of this house is all verse and melody.In fine, whoever has found the way into this houseIs sultan of the world and Solomon of the time.O master, bend down thy head once from this roof,For in thy fair face is a token of fortune.I swear by thy soul that save the sight of thy countenance,All, tho”twere the kingdom of the earth, is fantasy and fable.The garden is bewildered to know which is the leaf, and which the blossom;The birds are distracted to know which is the snare and which the bait.This is the Lord of heaven, who resembles Venus and the moon,This is the house of Love, which has no bound or end.Like a mirror, the soul has received thy image in its heart;The tip of thy curl has sunk into the heart like a comb.Forasmuch as the women cut their hands in Joseph’s presence,Come to me, O soul, for the Beloved is in the midst.All the house are drunken — none has knowledgeOf each who enters that he is so-and-so or so-and-so.Do not sit intoxicated at the door: come into the house quickly;He is in the dark whose place is the threshold.Those drunk with God, tho’ they be thousands, are yet one;Those drunk with lust — tho’ it be a single one, he is a double.Go into the wood of lions and reck not of the wound,For thought and fear — all these are figments of women.For there is no wound: all is mercy and love,But thy imagination is like a bar behind the door.Set fire to the wood, and keep silence, O heart;Draw back thy tongue, for thy tongue is harmful. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XVI. 
Show thy face, for I desire the orchard and the rose-garden;Ope thy lips, for I desire sugar in plenty.O sun, show forth thy face from the veil of cloud,For I desire that radiant glowing countenance.From love for thee I hearkened to the sound of the falcon-drum;I have returned, for the sultan’s arm is my desire.‘Vex me no more,’ thou saidst capriciously, ‘begone!I desire that saying of thine, ‘Vex me no more.’And thy bidding off with ‘Depart, he is not at home.’And the airs and pride and harshness of the door-keeper I desire.O sweet zephyr, that blowest from the flower-plot of the Friend,Blow on me, for I desire news of the basil.The bread and water of destiny is like a treacherous flood;I am a great fish and desire the sea of ‘Oman.Like Jacob I am uttering cries of grief,I desire the fair face of Joseph of Canaan.By God, without thee the city is a prison to me,O’er mountain and desert I desire to wander.In one hand a wine-cup and in one hand a curl of the Beloved:Such a dance in the midst of the market-place is my desire.My heart is weary of these weak-spirited companions;I desire the Lion of God and Rustam, son of Zal.Filings of beauty are in the possession of every one that exists;I desire that quarry and that mine of exquisite loveliness.Bankrupt tho’ I be, I will not accept a small carnelian;The mine of rare tremulous carnelian is my desire.Of this folk I am full of complaint, weeping and weary;I desire the drunkards’ wailing and lamentation.My soul is grown weary of Pharaoh and his tyranny;I desire the light of the countenance of Moses, son of ‘Imran.They said, ‘He is not to be found, we have sought Him long.’A thing which is not to be found — that is my desire.I am more eloquent than the nightingale, but because of vulgar envyA seal is on my tongue, tho’ I desire to moan.Yesterday the Master with a lantern was roaming about the city,Crying, ‘I am tired of devil and beast, I desire a man.’My state has passed even beyond all yearning and desire;I desire to go from Being and Place toward the Essentials.He is hidden from our eyes, and all objects are from Him;I desire that hidden One whose works are manifest.Mine ear listened to the tale of faith and was intoxicated;Say, ‘The limbs and the body and the form of faith are my desire.’I myself am Love’s rebeck, and Love is a rebeck to me;I desire the hand and bosom and modulation of ‘Othman.That rebeck is saying, ‘Every moment passionatelyI desire the favours of the mercy of the Merciful.’O cunning minstrel, con the rest of this odeAfter this fashion, for after this fashion I desire.Display, O Sun who art Tabriz’s glory, the dawning of Love;I am the hoopoe: the presence of Solomon is my desire. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XVII. 
I was on that day when the Names were not,Nor any sign of existence endowed with name.By me Names and Named were brought to viewOn the day when there were not ‘I’ and ‘We.’For a sign, the tip of the Beloved’s curl became a centre of revelation;As yet the tip of that fair curl was not.Cross and Christians, from end to end,I surveyed; He was not on the Cross.I went to the idol-temple, to the ancient pagoda;No trace was visible there.I went to the mountains of Herat and Candahar;I looked; He was not in that hill-and-dale.With set purpose I fared to the summit of Mount Qaf;In that place was only the ‘Anqa’s habitation.I bent the reins of search to the Ka’ba;He was not in that resort of old and young.I questioned Ibn Sina of his state;He was not in Ibn Sina’s range.I fared towards the scene of “two bow-lengths’ distance;He was not in that exalted court.I gazed into my own heart;There I saw Him; He was nowhere else.Save pure-souled Shamsi TabrizNone ever was drunken and intoxicated and distraught 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XVIII. 
Before thee the soul is hourly decaying and growing,And for one souls sake how should any plead with thee?Wherever thou settest foot a head springs up from the earth;For one head’s sake why should any wash his hands of thee?That day when the soul takes flight enraptured by thy fragrance,The soul knows, the soul knows what fragrance is the Beloved’s.As soon as thy fumes vanish out of the brain,The head heaves a hundred sighs, every hair is lamenting.I have emptied house, to be quit of the furniture;I am waning, that thy love may increase and wax.’Tis best to gamble the soul away for so great a gain.Peace! for it is worth, O master, just that which it seeks.My soul in pursuit of thy love, Shamsu ‘I Haqq-of Tabriz,IN scudding without feet, ship-like, over the sea. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XIX. 
At morning-tide a moon appeared in the sky,And descended from the sky and gazed on me.Like a falcon which snatches a bird at the time of hunting,That moon snatched me up and coursed over the sky.When I looked at myself, I saw myself no more,Because in that moon my body became by grace even as soul.When I travelled in soul, I saw nought save the moon,Till the secret of the eternal Theophany was all revealed.The nine spheres of heaven were all merged in that moon,The vessel of my being was completely hidden in the sea.The sea broke into waves, and again Wisdom roseAnd cast abroad a voice; so it happened and thus it befell.Foamed the sea, and at every foam-fleckSomething took figure and something was bodied forth.Every foam-fleck of body, which received a sign from that sea,Melted straightway and turned to spirit in this ocean.Without the power imperial of Shamsu ‘I Haqq of TabrizOne could neither behold the moon nor become the sea. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XX. 
Grasp the skirt of his favour, for on a sudden he will flee;But draw him not, as an arrow, for he will flee from the bow.What delusive forms does he take, what tricks does he invent!If he is present in form, he will flee by the way of spirit.Seek him in the sky, he shines in water, like the moon;When you come into the water, he will flee to the sky.Seek him in the placeless, be will sign you to place;When you seek him in place, he will flee to the placeless.As the arrow speeds from the bow, like the bird of your imagination,Know that the Absolute will certainly flee from the Imaginary.I will flee from this and that, not for weariness, but for fearThat my gracious Beauty will flee from this and that.As the wind I am fleet of foot, from love of the rose I am like the zephyr;The rose in dread of autumn will flee from the garden.His name will flee, when it sees an attempt at speech,So that you cannot even say, ‘Such an one will flee.’He will flee from you, so that if you limn his picture,The picture will fly from the tablet, the impression will flee from the soul. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XXI. 
A beauty that all night long teaches love-tricks to Venus and the moonWhose two eyes by their witchery seal up the two eyes of heaven.Look to your hearts! I, whate’er betide, O Moslems,Am so mingled with him that no heart is mingled with me.I was born of his love at the first, I gave him my heart at the last;When the fruit springs from the bough, on that bough it hangs.The tip of his curl is saying, ‘Ho! betake thee to ropedancing.’The cheek of his candle is saying, ‘Where is a moth that it may burn?’For the sake of dancing on that rope, O heart, make haste, become a hoop;Cast thyself on the flame, when his candle is lit.Thou wilt never more endure without the flame, whenthou hast known the rapture of burning;If the water of life should come to thee, it would not stir thee from the flame. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XXII. 
Quoth some one, ‘Master Sana is dead.’The death of such a master is no little thing.He was not chaff which flew on the wind,He was not water which froze in winter.He was not a comb which was broken with an hair,He was not a seed which the earth crushed.He was a treasure of gold in this dust-pit,For he valued the two worlds at a barley-corn.The earthly frame he flung to the earth,Soul and intellect he bore to heaven.The pure elixir mingled with the wine-dregsCame to the jar’s surface, and the lees settled apart.The second soul which the vulgar know notI protest by God that he surrendered to the Beloved.In travel, dear friend, there meet togetherThe native of Mary and of Rai, the Roman and the Kurd.Each one returns to his home;How should an old man be the companion of youths?Keep silence, like the points (of a compass), because the KingHas erased thy name from the book of speech. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XXIII. 
No favour was left which that winsome beauty did not bestow.What fault of ours, if he failed in bounty towards you?Thou art reviling, because that charmer wrought tyranny;Who ever saw in the two worlds a fair one that played not the tyrant?His love is a sugar-cane, tho’ he gave not sugar;His beauty is perfect faith, tho’ he kept not faith.Show a house that is not filled by him with lamps,Show a portico that his face filled not with loveliness.When the spirit became lost in contemplation, it said this:‘None but God has contemplated the beauty of God.’This eye and that lamp are two lights, each individual;When they came together, no one distinguished them.Each of these metaphors is at once an explanation and a misconception;God revealed “By the morning splendour” in envy of the light of his countenance.Never did the tailor, Destiny, to any one’s measureStitch a shirt but he tore it in pieces.The sun of the face of Shamsi Din, glory of the horizons,Never shone upon aught perishable but he made it eternal. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XXIV. 
When my bier moveth on the day of death,Think not my heart is in this world.Do not weep for me and cry ‘Woe, woe!’Thou wilt fall in the devils snare: that is woe.When thou seest my hearse, cry not ‘Parted, parted!”Union and meeting are mine in that hour.If thou commit me to the grave, say not ‘Farewell, farewell!’For the grave is a curtain hiding the communion of Paradise.After beholding descent, consider resurrection;Why should setting be injurious to the sun and moon?To thee it seems a setting, but ’tis a rising;Tho’ the vault seems a prison, ’tis the release of the soul.What seed went down into the earth but it grew?Why this doubt of thine as regards the seed of man?What bucket was lowered but it came out brimful?Why should the Joseph of the spirit complain of the well?Shut thy mouth on this side and open it beyond,For in placeless air will be thy triumphal song. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XXV. 
Look on me, for thou art my companion in the graveOn the night when thou shalt pass from shop and dwelling.Thou shalt hear my hail in the hollow of the tomb: it shall become known to theeThat thou wast never concealed from mine eye.I am as reason and intellect within thy bosomAt the time of joy and gladness, at the time of sorrow and distress.O strange night when thou hear’st the well-known voice,Scap’st from the stroke of asp, and leap’st from the horror of ant!Love’s intoxication will bring to thy grave, as a gift,Wine and mistress and candle and meats and sweets and incense.In the hour when the intellectual lamp is lighted,What a paean goes up from the dead men in the tombs!The earth of the grave-yard is confounded by their cries,By the din of the drums of resurrection, by the pomp of rising from the dead.They have rent their shrouds, they have pressed tight their two ears in terror;What is brain and ear before the blast of the trumpet?Look to thine eye, that thou mistake not,That unto thee the essence of seer and seen may be one.To whatever side thou gaze, my form thou shalt espy,Whether thou gaze on self or towards that moil and mell.Shun distorted vision and heal thine eyes,For in that moment the evil eye shall be far from my beauty.O take heed, lest thou misconceive me in human shape,For spirit is very subtle, and love is very jealous.What room for form, if the felt is hundredfold?Tis the rays of the soul’s mirror that bring the world to view.Had they sought God instead of morsel and pittance,Thou hadst not seen a single blind man seated on the moat-edge.Since Thou hast opened house in our city as dealer in amorous glances,Deal out glances, like light, with closed lips.I hold my peace and keep the unworthy in the dark;Thou art all that is worthy: the mystery is veiled from me.Come, like the Sun of Tabriz, towards the east;See the star of victory and the conqueror’s banner! 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XXVI. 
From the bosom of Self I catch continually a scent of the Beloved:How should I not, every night, take Self to my bosom?Yestereve I was in Love’s garden: this desire came into my head:His sun peeped forth from mine eye: the river (of tears) began to flow.Each laughing rose that springs from his laughing lipHad escaped the thorn of being, had avoided Dhu ‘Ifiqar.Every tree and blade of grass was dancing in the meadow,But in the view of the vulgar they were bound and at rest.Suddenly on one side our Cypress appeared,So that the garden became senseless and the plane clapped its hands.A face like fire, wine like fire, Love afire — all three delectable;The soul, by reason of the mingled fires, was wailing ‘Where shall I flee?’In the world of Divine Unity is no room for Number,But Number necessarily exists in the world of Five and Four.You may count a hundred thousand sweet apples in your hand:If you wish to make One, crush them all together.Behold, without regarding the letters, what is this language in the heart;Pureness of colour is a quality derived from the Source of Action.Shamsi Tabriz is seated in royal state, and before himMy rhymes are ranked like willing servants. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XXVII. 
If a tree might move by foot and wing,It would not suffer the pain of the saw or the blows of the axe.And if the sun did not fare by wing and foot every night,How would the world be illuminated at morning-tide?And if the salt water did not go up from the sea to the sky,Whence would the garden be quickened by river and rain?When the drop departed from its native home and returned,It found a shell and became a pearl.Did not Joseph go on a journey from his father, weeping?Did he not, in the journey, come to fortune and kingdom and victory?Did not Mustafa go a-journeying toward Medina,Gain sovereignty and become lord of an hundred lands?Tho’ you have no feet choose to journey in yourself,Like the ruby-mine receive a print from the sunbeams.Make a journey out of self into self, O master,For by such a journey earth becomes a quarry of gold.From sourness and bitterness advance to sweetness,Even as from briny soil a thousand sorts of fruit spring up.From the Sun, the pride of Tabriz, behold these miracles,For every tree gains beauty by the light of the sun. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XXVIII. 
I cried out at midnight, ‘Who is in this house of the heart?’He said, ‘’Tis I, by whose countenance moon and sun are shamed.’He said, ‘Why is this house of the heart filled with diverse images?’Said I, ‘They are the reflexion of thee, O thou whose face is a candle of Chigil.’He said, ‘What is this other image, bedabbled with heart’s blood?’Said I, ‘This is the image of me, heart-sore and with feet in the mire.’I bound the neck of my soul and brought it to him as a token:‘It is the confidant of Love; do not sacrifice thine own confidant.’He gave me the end of a thread — a thread full of mischief and guile — ‘Pull,’ he said, ‘that I may pull, and break it not in the pulling.’From the tent of the soul flashed out the form of my Beloved, fairer than before;I stretched my hands to him; he struck my hand, saying, ‘Let go.’I said, ‘Thou art harsh, like such an one.’ ‘Know.’ he replied,‘That I am harsh for good, not from rancour and spite.Whoever enters saying, “Tis I,” I smite him on the brow;For this is the shrine of Love, O fool! It is not a sheep-cote.’Assuredly Salahi dil “din is the image of that Fair One;Rub thine eyes, and behold the image of the heart, the image of the heart. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XXIX. 
Why does not the soul take wing, when from the glorious PresenceA speech of sweet favour comes to it, saying, ‘Aloft’?How should a fish not leap nimbly from the dry land into the water,When the sound of waves reaches its ear from the cold ocean?Why should a falcon not fly from the quarry towards the King,When it hears by drum and drum-stick the notice of “Return”?Why should not every Sufi begin to dance, like a mote,In the sun of eternity, that it may deliver him from decay?Such grace and beauty and loveliness and bestowal of life!O misery and error, if any one dispense with Him!Fly, fly, O bird, to thy native home,For thou hast escaped from the cage, and thy pinions are outspread.Travel away from the bitter stream towards the water of life,Return from the vestibule to the high seat of the soul.Haste, haste! for we too, O soul, are comingFrom this world of severance to that world of union.O how long shall we, like children, in the earthly sphereFill our lap with dust and stones and sherds?Let us give up the earth and fly heavenwards,Let us flee from childhood to the banquet of men.Behold how the earthly frame has entrapped thee!Bend the sack and raise thy head clear.Take from Love this scroll with thy right hand;Thou art no child, not to know thy right from thy left.God said to Reasons messenger, ‘Begone.’To the hand of Death he said, ‘Chastise worldly desire.’A voice came to the spirit, ‘Spirit thee away to the Unseen,Take the gain and the treasure and lament the pain no more.’Cry out and proclaim that thou art King;Thine is the grace of answer, and thine is the knowledge of question. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XXX. 
Thee I choose, of all the world, alone;Wilt thou suffer me to sit in grief?My heart is as a pen in thy hand,Thou art the cause if I am glad or melancholy.Save what thou wiliest, what will have I?Save what thou showest, what do I see?Thou mak’st grow out of me now a thorn and now a roseNow I smell roses and now pull thorns.If thou keep’st me that, that I am;If thou would’st have me this, I am this.In the vessel where thou givest colour to the soulWho am I, what is my love and hate?Thou wert first, and last thou shalt be;Make my last better than my first.When thou art hidden, I am of the infidels;When thou art manifest, I am of the faithful.I have nothing, except thou hast bestowed it;What dost thou seek from my bosom and sleeve? 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XXXI. 
What is to be done, O Moslems? for I do not recognise myself.I am neither Christian, nor Jew, nor Gabr, nor Moslem.I am not of the East, nor of the West, nor of the land, nor of the sea;I am not of Nature’s mint, nor of the circling heavens.I am not of earth, nor of water, nor of air, nor of fire;I am not of the empyrean, nor of the dust, nor of existence, nor of entity.I am not of India, nor of China, nor of Bulgaria, nor of Saqsin;I am not of the kingdom of ‘Iraqain, nor of the country of Khorasan.I am not of this world, nor of the next, nor of Paradise, nor of Hell;I am not of Adam, nor of Eve, nor of Eden and Rizwan.My place is the Placeless, my trace is the Traceless;’Tis neither body nor soul, for I belong to the soul of the Beloved.I have put duality away, I have seen that the two worlds are one;One I seek, One I know, One I see, One I call.He is the first, He is the last, He is the outward, He is the inward;I know none other except ‘Ya Hu’ and ‘Ya man Hu.’I am intoxicated with Love’s cup, the two worlds have passed out of my ken;I have no business save carouse and revelry.If once in my life I spent a moment without thee,From that time and from that hour I repent of my life.If once in this world I win a moment with thee,I will trample on both worlds, I will dance in triumph for ever.O Shamsi Tabriz, I am so drunken in this world,That except of drunkenness and revelry I have no tale to tell. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XXXII. 
No joy have I found in the two worlds apart from thee, Beloved.Many wonders I have seen: I have not seen a wonder like thee.They say that blazing fire is the infidel’s portion:I have seen none, save Abu Lahab, excluded from thy fire.Often have I laid the spiritual ear at the window of the heart:I heard much discourse, but the lips I did not see.Of a sudden thou didst lavish grace upon thy servant:I saw no cause for it but thy infinite kindness.O chosen Cup-bearer, O apple of mine eyes, the like of theeNe’er appeared in Persia, nor in Arabia have I found it.Pour out wine till I become a wanderer from myself;For in selfhood and existence I have felt only fatigue.O thou who art milk and sugar, O thou who art sun and moon,O thou who art mother and father, I have known no kin but thee.O indestructible Love, O divine Minstrel,Thou art both stay and refuge: a name equal to thee I have not found.We are pieces of steel, and thy love is the magnet:Thou art the source of all aspiration, in myself I have seen none.Silence, O brother! put learning and culture away:Till Thou namedst culture, I knew no culture but Thee. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XXXIII. 
I am that supplicant who make supplication to thee;The anguish inspired by a charmer like thee hath for me a thousand charms.Thou art the sun of mine eyes — they are radiant with thy beauty;If I draw them away from thee, to whom shall I look again?I will not become inconstant to thee on account of thy cruel treatment;By remaining constant myself I will restrain thee from cruelty.I complained of thee, thou saidst: ‘Provide thine own remedy.’I am one whose heart provides a remedy for Divine affliction.I will not tell thee my heart’s grief, for it would weary thee;I will shorten this tale, for mine is a long grief. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XXXIV. 
I am a painter, a maker of pictures; every moment Ishape a beauteous form,And then in thy presence I melt them all away.I call up a hundred phantoms and indue them with a spirit;When I behold thy phantom, I cast them in the fire.Art thou the Vintner’s cup-bearer or the enemy of him who is sober,Or is it thou who mak’st a ruin of every house I build?In thee the soul is dissolved, with thee it is mingled;Lo! I will cherish the soul, because it has a perfume of thee.Every drop of blood which proceeds from me is saying to thy dust:‘I am one colour with thy love, I am the partner of thy affection.’In the house of water and clay this heart is desolate without thee;O Beloved, enter the house, or I will leave it. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XXXV. 
This is Love: to fly heavenward,To rend, every instant, a hundred veils.The first moment, to renounce life;The last step, to fare without feet.To regard this world as invisible,Not to see what appears to ones self.‘O heart.’ I said, ‘may it bless theeTo have entered the circle of lovers,To look beyond the range of the eye,To penetrate the windings of the bosom!Whence did this breath come to thee, O my soul,Whence this throbbing, O my heart?O bird, speak the language of birds:I can understand thy hidden meaning.The soul answered: ‘I was in the (divine) FactoryWhile the house of water and clay was a-baking.I was flying away from the (material) workshopWhile the workshop was being created.When I could resist no more, they dragged meTo mould me into shape like a ball.’ 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XXXVI. 
O lovers, O lovers, it is time to abandon the world;The drum of departure reaches my spiritual ear from heaven.Behold, the driver has risen and made ready the files of camels,And begged us to acquit him of blame: why, O travellers, are you asleep?These sounds before and behind are the din of departure and of the camel-bells;With each moment a soul and a spirit is setting off into the Void.From these (stars like) inverted candles, from these blue awnings (of the sky)There has come forth a wondrous people, that the mysteries may be revealed.A heavy slumber fell upon thee from the circling spheres:Alas for this life so light, beware of this slumber so heavy!O soul, seek the Beloved, O friend, seek the Friend,O watchman, be wakeful: it behoves not a watchman to sleep.On every side is clamour and tumult, in every street are candles and torches,For to-night the teeming world gives birth to the world everlasting.Thou wert dust and art spirit, thou wert ignorant and art wise;He who has led thee thus far will lead thee further also.How pleasant are the pains he makes thee suffer while he gently draws thee to himself!His flames are as water: do not frown upon him.To dwell in the soul is his task, to break vows of penitence is his task;By his manifold artifice these atoms are trembling at their core.O ridiculous puppet that leapest out of thy hole, as ifto say, ‘I am the lord of the land.’How long wilt thou leap? Abase thyself, or they will bend thee, like a bow.Thou didst sow the seed of deceit, thou didst indulge in derision,Thou didst regard God as nothing: see now, O miscreant!O ass, thou wert best with straw; thou art a caldron: thou wert best black;Thou wert best at the bottom of a well, O disgrace of thy house and family!In me there is Another by whom these eyes sparkle;If water scalds, ’tis by fire; understand this.I have no stone in my hand, I have no quarrel with any one,I deal harshly with none, because I am sweet as a garden of roses.Mine eye, then, is from that source and from another universe;Here a world and there a world: I am seated on the threshold.On the threshold are they alone whose eloquence is mute;’Tis enough to utter this intimation: say no more, draw back thy tongue. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XXXVII. 
I have heard that thou dost intend to travel: do not so.That thou beatowest thy love on a new friend and companion: do not so.Tho’ in the world thou art strange, thou hast never known estrangement;What heart-stricken wretch art thou attempting? do not so.Steal not thyself away from me, go not to aliens;Thou art stealthily glancing at another: do not so.O moon for whose sake the heavens are bewildered,Thou makest me distraught and bewildered: do not so.Where is the pledge and where the compact thou didst make with me?Thou departest from thy word and pledge: do not so.Why give promises and why utter protestations,Why make a shield of vows and blandishments? do not so.O thou whose vestibule is above existence and nonexistence,At this moment thou art passing from existence: do not so.O thou whose command Hell and Paradise obey,Thou art making Paradise like Hell-fire to me: do not so.In thy plot of sugar-canes I am secure from poison;Thou minglest the poison with the sugar: do not so,My soul is like a fiery furnace, yet it sufficed thee not;By absence thou art making my face pale as gold: do not so.When thou withdrawest thy countenance, the moon is darkened with grief;Thou art intending the eclipse of the moon’s orb: do not so.Our lips become dry when thou bringest a drought;Why art thou moistening mine eye with tears? do not so.Since thou canst not endure the reasoning faculty of lovers,Then why dost thou dazzle the eye of reason? do not so.Thou art denying sweetmeats to one sick of abstinence;Thou art making thy patient worse: do not so.My lawless eye is a thief of thy beauty;O Beloved, thou tak’st vengeance on my thievish sight: do not so.Withdraw, comrade, ’tis no time for speech;In love’s bewilderment why dost thou intrude thyself? do not so.Except the beauty of Shamsi Din, the pride of Tabriz,If so be that thou throwest a glance upon (aught in) the two worlds, do not so. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XXXVIII. 
Happy the moment when we are seated in the palace, thou and I,With two forms and with two figures but with one soul, thou and I.The colours of the grove and the voice of the birds will bestow immortalityAt the time when we come into the garden, thou and I.The stars of heaven will come to gaze upon us;We shall show them the moon itself, thou and I.Thou and I, individuals no more, shall be mingled in ecstasy,Joyful, and secure from foolish babble, thou and I,All the bright-plumed birds of heaven will devour their hearts with envyIn the place where we shall laugh in such a fashion, thou and I.This is the greatest wonder, that thou and I, sitting here in the same nook,Are at this moment both in ‘Iraq and Khorasan, thou and I. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XXXIX. 
I went to the Master’s abode and said: ‘Where is the Master VHe said: ‘The Master is in love and intoxicated and a wanderer from place to place.’I said: ‘I have an obligation, at least give me a clue;I am the Master’s friend: nay, indeed, I am no enemy.’They replied: ‘The Master is fallen in love with the Gardener;Seek him in gardens or on the bank of a stream.’Frenzied lovers pursue the object of their love;If any one has fallen in love, go, wash thy hands of him!The fish that has known water comes not to land:How should a lover stay in the sphere of colour and perfume?The frozen snow that has beheld the face of yonder Sun,Is swallowed up by the sun, tho’ it be piled in drifts.Especially one who is the lover of our King,A king peerless and faithful and sweet-tempered.By that infinite alchemy, which none may compute or conjecture,Copper, as soon as it is touched, becomes gold at the command, “Return.”Sleep the world away, and flee from the six dimensions;How long wilt thou roam in thy folly and bewilderment to and fro?Inevitably they will bring thee at last, with thy own consent,That thou mayst have honour and glory in the presence of the King.Had not there been an intruder in the company,Jesus would have revealed to thee the mysteries, point by point.I have closed the passage of the lips, and opened the secret way;I am free in one moment from the desire of speech. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XL. 
O my soul, who is this, stationed in the house of the heart?Who may occupy the royal seat save the King and the Prince?He beckoned with his hand: ‘Say, what do you desire of me?’What does a drunken man desire except sweetmeats and a cup of wine?Sweetmeats derived from the soul, a cup of the Absolute Light,An eternal banquet laid in the privacy of “He is the Truth”.How many deceivers are there at the wine-drinkers’ feast!Take heed lest thou fall, O easy simple man!Beware! do not keep, in a circle of reprobates,Thine eye shut like a bud, thy mouth open like the rose.The world resembles a mirror: thy Love is the perfect image;O people, who has ever seen a part greater than the whole?Go on foot, like the grass, because in this gardenThe Beloved, like the rose, is riding, all the rest are on foot.He is both the sword and the swordsman, both the slain and the slayer,He is at once all Reason and brings Reason to nought.That King is Salahu’ddin — may he endure for ever,May his bounteous hand perpetually be a necklace on my neck! 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XLI. 
I saw my Beloved wandering about the house:He had taken up a rebeck and was playing a tune.With a touch like fire he was playing a sweet melody,Drunken and distraught and bewitching from the night’s carouse.He was invoking the cup-bearer in the mode of ‘Iraq;Wine was his object, the cup-bearer was only an excuse.The beauteous cup-bearer, pitcher in hand,Stepped forth from a recess and placed it in the middle.He filled the first cup with that sparkling wine — Didst thou ever see water set on fire?For the sake of those in love he passed it from hand to hand,Then bowed and kissed the lintel.My Beloved received it from him, and quaffed the wine:Instantly o’er his face and head ran flashes of flame.Meanwhile he was regarding his own beauty and saying to the evil eye,‘There has not been nor will be in this age another like me.I am the Divine Sun of the world, I am the Beloved of lovers,Soul and spirit are continually moving before me.’ 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XLII. 
Make yourself like to the community, that you may feel spiritual joy;Enter the street of the tavern, that you may behold the wine-bibbers.Drain the cup of passion, that you may not be shamed;Shut the eyes in your head, that you may see the hidden eye.Open your arms, if you desire an embrace;Break the idol of clay, that you may behold the face of the Pair.Why, for an old woman’s sake, do you endure so large a dowry,And how long, for the sake of three loaves, will you look on the sword and the spear?Always at night returns the Beloved: do not eat opium to-night;Close your mouth against food, that you may taste the sweetness of the mouth.Lo, the cup-bearer is no tyrant, and in his assembly there is a circle:Come into the circle, be seated; how long will you regard the revolution (of time)?Look now, here is a bargain: give one life and receive a hundred.Cease to behave as wolves and dogs, that you may experience the Shepherd’s love.You said: ‘My foe took such an one away from me’:Go, renounce that person in order to contemplate the being of Him.Think of nothing except the creator of thought;Tare for the soul is better than feeling care for one’s bread.Why, when God’s earth is so wide, have you fallen asleep in a prison?Avoid entangled thoughts, that you may see the explanation in Paradise.Refrain from speaking, that you may win speech hereafter;Abandon life and the world, that you may behold the Life of the world. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XLIII. 
The knowledge has newly come: perchance you have no knowledge.The envious heart is bleeding: perchance you have no heart.The moon has revealed her face and opened her radiant wings:Borrow a soul and eyes from some one, if you have them not.Night and day comes a winged arrow from the hidden bow.Yield up your sweet life; what can you do? you have no shield.Has not the copper of your existence been changed, like Moses, to gold by his alchemy?What matter tho’ you have no gold in a sack, like Qarun?Within you is an Egypt, and you are its garden of sugarcanes;What matter tho’ you have no supply of sugar from without?You are become a slave to form, like idol-worshippers;You resemble Joseph and yet you gaze not on yourself.By God, when you behold your own beauty in the mirror,You will be the idol of yourself, you will not pass over to any one.O Reason, art not thou unjust in calling him moon-like?Wherefore dost thou call him moon? perchance thou hast no sight.Your head is like a lamp containing six wicks:How should all the six be alight unless you have that spark?Your body is like a camel which goes to the Ka’ba of the soul;You failed to go on the pilgrimage because of your ass’s nature, not because you have no ass.If you have not gone to the Ka’ba, Fortune will draw you thither;Do not flee, O babbler, for you have no refuge from God. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XLIV. 
O heart, why art thou a captive in the earth that is passing away?Fly forth from this enclosure, since thou art a bird of the spiritual world.Thou art a darling bosom-friend, thou art always behind the secret veil:Why dost thou make thy dwelling-place in this perishable abode?Regard thine own state, go forth and journeyFrom the prison of the Formal world to the meadow of Ideas.Thou art a bird of the holy world, a boon-companion in the assembly of Love;If thou wilt remain here, ’tis a pity.Every morning a voice comes to thee from heaven:‘When thou lay’st the dust of the way, thou win’st thy way to the goal.’On the road to the Ka’ba of union, lo, in every thornbushAre thousands slain of desire who manfully yielded up their lives.Thousands sank wounded on this path, to whom there came notA breath of the fragrance of union, a token from the neighbourhood of the Friend.In memory of the banquet of union, in yearning for his beautyThey are fallen bewildered by the wine thou knowest.How sweet, in the hope of him, on the threshold of his abode,For the sake of seeing his face, to bring night round to day!Illumine thy bodily senses by the light of the soul:The senses are the five prayers, but the heart is the seven verses.The moon and the sun and the axis of the seven heavens are swallowedBy the Canopus of the soul, when it rises from towards the southern angle.Look not in the world for bliss and fortune, since thou wilt not find them;Seek bliss in both worlds by serving Him.Put away the tale of love that travellers tell;Do thou serve God with all thy might.From the Sun who is the glory of Tabriz seek future bliss,For he is a sun, possessing all kinds of knowledge, on the spiritual throne. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XLV. 
Come, come, for you will not find another friend like me.Where indeed is a Beloved like me in all the world?Come, come, and do not spend your life in wandering to and fro,Since there is no market elsewhere for your money.You are as a dry valley and I as the rain,You are as a ruined city and I as the architect.Except my service, which is joy’s sunrise,Man never has felt and never will feel an impression of joy.You behold in dreams a thousand moving shapes;When the dream is past you do not see a single one of the kind.Close the eye that sees falsely and open the intellectual eye,For the senses resemble an ass, and evil desire is the halter.Seek sweet syrup in the garden of Love,For Nature is a seller of vinegar and a crusher of unripened grapes.Come to the hospital of your own Creator:No sick man can dispense with that Physician.The world without that King is like a headless body:Fold yourself, turban-wise, round such a head.Unless you are black, do not let the mirror go from your hand:The soul is your mirror, while the body is rust.Where is the fortunate merchant, whose destiny Jupiter controls,That I may eagerly trade with him and buy his wares?Come, and think of me who gave you the faculty of thought,Since from my mine you may purchase an ass-load of rubies.Come, advance towards him who gave you a foot,Look with all your eyes on him who gave you an eye.Clap your hands for joy of him, by whose sea the hand (foam) is produced,For his joy admits no sorrow nor affliction.Listen without ears, speak to him without tongue,Since the speech of the tongue is not without offence and injury. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XLVI. 
Look on the face of Love, that you may be properly a man.Do not sit with the frigid; for you will be chilled by their breath.Seek from the face of Love something other than beauty;It is time that you should consort with a sympathetic companion.Since you are properly a clod, you will not rise into the air;You will rise into the air, if you break and become dust.If you break not, He who moulded you will break you;When death breaks you, how should you become a separate substance?When the leaf grows yellow, the fresh root makes it green;You are complaining of Love thro’ which you become pale.And, O friend, if you reach perfection in our assembly,Your seat will be the throne, you will gain your desire in all things.But if you stay many years more in this earth,You will pass from place to place, you will be as the dice in backgammon.If Shamsi Tabriz draws you to his side,When you escape from captivity you will return to that orb. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XLVII. 
When I came to thy city, thou chosest a corner apart from me;When I went from thy city, thou didst not look upon me to say ‘Farewell’.Whether thou choosest to be kind or inclinest to rancour,Thou art all the comfort of the soul, thou art all the adornment of the feast.The cause of thy jealousy is that thou art hidden or, otherwise,While thou art revealed by every atom, thou art hidden like the sun.If thou dwell’st in seclusion, art not thou the darling of the Prince?And if thou rendest the veil, thou hast rent the veils of all.By thee the heart of infidelity is confounded, by thy wine the head of faith I intoxicated;Thou dost rob all of sense, thou dost draw all towards thee.All roses are a prey to December, all heads, a prey to wine:Both these and those thou redeemest from the hand of death.Since in the rose there is no constancy, why do you approach every rose?On thee alone is reliance: thou art the stay and support.If a few cut their hands on account of Joseph’s face,Thou hast bereft of soul and reason two hundred spiritual Josephs.Thou mouldest of foul and fair the form of a man,That he may flee two leagues from the odour of foulness.Thou mak’st him a morsel of dust that he may become pure herbage;He is free from filth when thou hast breathed into him a soul.Come, O heart, fare heavenward, fare to the divine pasture,Since thou hast grazed awhile in the pasture of cattle.Set thy whole desire on that whereof thou hast no hope,For thou hast come thus far from original hopelessness.Be silent that the lord who gave thee language may speak,For as he fashioned a door and lock, he has also made a key. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





XLVIII. 
At last thou hast departed and gone to the Unseen;’Tis marvellous by what way thou wentest from the world.Thou didst strongly shake thy wings and feathers, and having broken thy cageDidst take to the air and journey towards the world of soul.Thou wert a favourite falcon, kept in captivity by an old woman:When thou heard’st the falcon-drum thou didst fly away into the Void.Thou wert a love-lorn nightingale among owls:The scent of the rose-garden reached thee, and thou didst go to the rose-garden.Thou didst suffer sore headache from this bitter ferment;At last thou wentest to the tavern of Eternity.Straight as an arrow thou didst make for the mark of bliss;Thou didst speed like an arrow to that mark from this bow.The world gave thee false clues, like a ghoul:Thou took’st no heed of the clue, but wentest to that which is without a clue.Since thou art now the sun, why dost thou wear a tiara,Why seek a girdle, since thou art gone from the middle?I have heard that thou art gazing with distorted eyes upon thy soul:Why dost thou gaze on thy soul, since thou art gone to the soul of Soul?O heart, what a wondrous bird art thou, that in chase of divine rewardsThou didst fly with two wings to the spear-point, like a shield!The rose flees from autumn — O what a fearless rose art thouWho didst go loitering along in the presence of the autumn wind!Falling like rain from heaven upon the roof of the terrestrial worldThou didst run in every direction till thou didst escape by the conduit.Ho silent and free from the pain of speech: do not slumber,Since thou hast taken refuge with so loving a Friend. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





The Biographies

This building in Antalya, Turkey, was in the 14th century used as a lodge for the Dervish order by Tekkeli Mehmet Pasha. Rumi passionately believed in the use of music, poetry and dance as a path for reaching God. It was from these ideas that the practice of Whirling Dervishes developed into a ritual form. His teachings became the base for the order of the Mevlevi, which his son Sultan Walad established. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series






Whirling Dervishes at Rumi Fest 2007






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





THE LIFE AND WORK OF JALÁLU’D-DÍN RÚMÍ by Frederick Hadland Davis
 





Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





CONTENTS 
I. LIFE
II. SHAMSI TABRIZ
III. THE STORIES OF AL-AFLĀKÍ AND THE DEATH OF JALÁLU’D-DÍN RÚMÍ.
IV. THE NATURE AND SIGNIFICANCE OF JALÁLU’D-DÍN RÚMÍ’S POETRY
SELECTIONS FROM THE “DĪVĀNI SHAMSI TABRĪZ”
SELECTIONS FROM THE “MASNAVI”
 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





I. LIFE 
Jalálu’d-Dín Rúmí was born at Balkh on September 30th, 1207, A.D., or according to Mohammedan reckoning, in 604 A.H. His father, Bahaū-’d-Dín, was a man of much learning, but gave offence to the reigning king by an attack on that monarch’s innovations. Another account disputes this in the place of jealousy on the part of the king. Whatever the cause, however, Bahaū-’d-Dín left Balkh, together with his family, and settled at Nishapur. It was here that the celebrated Súfí, Farídu’d-Dín ‘Attár, presented young Jalálu’d-Dín Rúmí with his Asrarnama, and informed his father that the child would some day become famous throughout the world. After the destruction of Balkh the family went to Qonia, an old Roman province, where the poet acquired his name Rúmí, or “the Roman.” Young Jalál must have been a child prodigy if we are to believe the many wonderful stories of his early days. At six years of age he is said to have seen visions, taught his playmates philosophy, and performed many marvellous feats, such as flying into the celestial regions. On the death of his father Jalál took the professorial chair. He also founded an order of Dervishes known as Maulavis, where he authorised music and religious dance. When asked why he introduced singing and dance at a funeral, such practice being contrary to custom, Jalál replied: “When the human spirit, after years of imprisonment in the cage and dungeon of the body, is at length set free, and wings its flight to the Source whence it came, is not this an occasion for rejoicings, thanks, and dancing?” Jalál was an indomitable optimist. In his sayings, and still more in his poetry, we find an almost untrammelled ecstasy. The religious dances, known as Rizā Kulī, may in some way account for Jalál’s occasional lack of care displayed in his poetry, and also for the outbursts not far removed from insanity. We are informed by Daulat Sháh that “There was a pillar in the Maulavi’s house, and when he was drowned in the ocean of Love he used to take hold of that pillar and set himself turning round it.” It was while turning round the pillar that he not infrequently dictated much of his poetry. As Mr. Arthur Symons has sung:
I turn until my sense,Dizzied with waves of air,Spins to a point intense,And spires and centres there. 
We can well imagine Jalál writing the following under the conditions just mentioned:
“Come! Come! Thou art the Soul, the Soul so dear, revolving!Come! Come! Thou art the Cedar, the Cedar’s Spear, revolving!Oh, come! The well of Light up-bubbling springs;And Morning Stars exult, in Gladness sheer, revolving!” 
In 1226 A.D. Jalál was married at Lerenda to Gevher (Pearl). She bore two sons and died early in life. Jalál married again and his second wife survived him.






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





II. SHAMSI TABRIZ 
A word must now be said about Shamsi Tabrīz, an intimate friend of Jalál. We have sufficient evidence to prove that Shamsi Tabrīz, Jalál’s nom de guerre, was an actual person, and not a mythical creation on the part of the poet. This mysterious being, who flitted across Jalál’s life so tragically, seems to have had great personal influence over the poet, who went with him into solitary places and there discussed profound mysteries. The scholars of Jalál looked upon the whole affair as an unworthy infatuation on the part of their Master, and on the part of Shams a shameful seduction. Their protests brought about the flight of Shams, who fled to Tabrīz. But it was only a momentary separation. Jalál followed this strange figure and brought him back again. Most of his lighter poetry was composed during this separation. Another disturbance, however, caused the departure of Shams to Damascus. We then have no clear record of him. Various legends exist in regard to the death of this mysterious person. It may be safely stated, however, that Shams met with a violent death, the exact nature of which it is impossible to say definitely.
This strange union is by no means unique in the history of the world’s literature. The union, however, in this particular case, is extremely difficult to rightly fathom. We may reasonably infer that Jalál’s intense poetic temperament became fascinated by the dogmatic and powerful Shams. The very treatment of this friendship, both in the Lyrical Poems, and in the Masnavi, is Súfí The two following quotations, from many that might be cited, will prove sufficient to illustrate this point:
The face of Shamsi Dín, Tabrīz’s glory, is the sunIn whose track the cloud-like hearts are moving. 
O Shamsi Tabrīz, beauty and glory of the horizons,What king but is a beggar of thee with heart and soul? 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





III. THE STORIES OF AL-AFLĀKÍ AND THE DEATH OF JALÁLU’D-DÍN RÚMÍ.  
The historian al-Aflākí, in his collection of anecdotes called Menaqibu ‘L ‘Arifin, gives a number of stories relating to the miracles and wise sayings of Jalál. Many of these miraculous performances were followed by the conversion of those who witnessed them. A marvel or a wise saying of Jalál was generally accompanied by music and dance, which reminds us of the jubilations of the Indian gods after Rama’s victories over his enemies. These stories, interesting enough in themselves, can scarcely be credited to such a learned man as Jalál undoubtedly was. According to tradition he spoke to frogs and fishes, raised the dead to life, and at the same time very ignominiously lost his temper when a disciple who said, after having received Jalál’s instructions: “God willing.” After all, the significance of Jalál lies not in these rather lamentable fairy tales, but in the fruit of his work. Jalál, like the Lord Buddha, suffered considerably from the addition of fabulous tales and fancies of no real moment to his teachings.
Al-Aflākí tells a pretty story concerning the tenderness of Jalál for little children. As the poet passed by some children, they left their play and ran to him and bowed. Jalál bowed in response. One little boy, some distance off, seeing the honour bestowed upon his playmates, cried to Jalál: “Wait for me until I come!” And Jalál waited and bowed to the little child. This story is worth far more than juggler’s tricks.
Jalálu’d-Dín Rúmí died at Qonia in 1273 A.D., praising God and leaving to the world a vast store of spiritual knowledge and many wise instructions to his son, Bahaū-’d-Dín Valad. It is very gratifying to note that at the death of Jalál his mourners were of all creeds. A Christian was asked why he wept over a Muslim grave, and he replied: “We esteem him as the Moses, the David, the Jesus of our time; and we are his disciples, his adherents.” This was indeed a splendid and worthy tribute to the memory of so great a man.
I hope I have already demonstrated that the very nature of Súfí poetry is entirely lacking in creed or dogma, and certainly the great singer of the Masnavi has left in his songs a wealth of the wonder of Divine Love.






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





IV. THE NATURE AND SIGNIFICANCE OF JALÁLU’D-DÍN RÚMÍ’S POETRY 
The Lyrical. — We have already noted the acceptance of the Asrarnama. Among the other literary influences, according to Mr. Nicholson, we may note the poems of Sana’ī, Sa’di, and Nīzamī. The fact that Jalál’s poetry sometimes faintly resembles Omar Khayyám’s is too slight to be of any value. Mr. Nicholson very ably sums up the nature of the Masnavi and Divan respectively: “The one is a majestic river, calm and deep, meandering through many a rich and varied landscape to the immeasurable ocean; the other a foaming torrent that leaps and plunges in the ethereal solitude of the hills.” The poetry of Jalál is not of equal merit. His work seldom if ever has the technical polish of Jámí. There is too much of it; too much produced in the belief that all his poetry was inspired. He is fond of harping on certain words, and as far as the translations are concerned he has little sense of humour. There was certainly room for a touch of humour in the poet’s description of Iblis receiving from God a gift of beautiful women whereby to tempt mankind; but Jalál entirely ignores it. These weaknesses are almost lost in the strength and purity and lyrical grandeur of many of Jalál’s poems. He carries us along on a torrent of heavenly music. The rhythmic, swing of his wonderful dance is soul-stirring. We seem to move exultantly, ecstatically, to the sound of the poet’s singing, far behind the silver stars into the Presence of the Beloved. With what reverence, with what a glow of simile and subtle suggestion he describes the Beauty of the Beloved! With what exquisite passion he foretells the Eternal Union! Then there is a lull in this fierce spiritual song, and Jalál sings, ever so gently and with an infinite tenderness, about human tears being turned into “rain-clouds.” He sings about the meeting of two friends in Paradise, with the oft-repeated refrain, “Thou and I.” There seems in this poem an indescribable and almost pathetic play on the idea of human friendship and the Divine Friendship, a yearning tenderness for that human shadow, passing shadow though it be. Jalál appears to have the power of producing almost orchestral effects in his music of the Spheres. There is that terrific touch of Wagner about his poetry, and in those suggestive Wagner-pauses there is a tenderness of expression more touching, more truly great than the loud triumphant notes. Jalál has truly said: “Our journey is to the Rose-Garden of Union.” He sang about, the Divine Rose-Garden; but he did not forget to sing about the roses that fade and the human hearts that ache. We seem to see Jalál ever bowing to the little child in all his wonderful singing.
The Masnavi. — Jalál is said to have been forty-three years engaged in writing the Masnavi. Often whole nights were spent in its composition, Jalál reciting and his friend Hasam copying it down and sometimes singing portions of the verse in his beautiful voice. At the completion of the first book Hasam’s wife died, and two years elapsed before the work was continued. The Masnavi is full of profound mysteries, and is a most important book in the study of Súfíism — mysteries which must, for the most part, be left to the discernment of the reader. Jalál himself has said that great Love is silent. It is in Silence that we shall come to understand the supreme Mystery of Love that has no comparison. The key-note to the Masnavi may be found in the Prologue to the first book. The poet here sings of the soul’s longing to be united with the Beloved. The fact that he, and all other Súfí poets, use as an analogy the love between man and woman renders the spiritual meaning extremely vague. We have, however, already considered this point in the introduction, and it needs no further explanation. The Masnavi has all the pantheistic beauty of the Psalms, the music of the hills, the colour and scent of roses, the swaying of forests; but it has considerably more than that. These things of scent and form and colour are the Mirror of the Beloved; these earthy loves the journey down the valley into the Rose-Garden where the roses never fade, and where Love is.
Book of Mysteries.
Iconium.
The Fool of the World.
The Festival of Spring. Translated by the Rev. Prof. William Hastie.
See The Masnavi. Translated by Sir James W. Rodhouse.
“The Acts of the Adepts.”
Prof. C. E. Wilson informs me that Jalál certainly had a very fair sense of humour, and that in the original there is often a clever and witty play on words.






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





SELECTIONS FROM THE “DĪVĀNI SHAMSI TABRĪZ” 
“I AM SILENT” 
I am silent. Speak Thou, O Soul of Soul of Soul,From desire of whose Face every atom grew articulate. 
A CRY TO THE BELOVED 
Yestereve I delivered to a star tidings for thee:“Present,” I said, “my service to that moon-like form.”I bowed, I said: “Bear that service to the sunWho maketh hard rocks gold by his burning.”I bared my breast, I showed it the wounds:“Give news of me,” I said, “to the Beloved whose drink is blood.”I rocked to and fro that the child, my heart, might become still;A child sleeps when one sways the cradle.Give my heart-babe milk, relieve us from its weeping,O Thou that helpest every moment a hundred helpless like me.The heart’s home, first to last, is Thy City of Union:How long wilt Thou keep in exile this heart forlorn? 
REMEMBER GOD AND FORGET SELF 
O spirit, make thy head in search and seeking like the water of a stream,And O reason, to gain Eternal Life tread ever-lastingly the way of Death.Keep God in remembrance till self is forgotten,That thou may be lost in the Called, without distraction of caller and call. 
“THE PRINCE OF THE FAIR” 
A garden — may its rose be in flower to Resurrection!An idol — may the two worlds be scattered o’er his beauty!The Prince of the Fair goes proudly forth to the chase at morning;May our hearts fall a prey to the arrow of His glanceFrom His eye what messages are passing continually to mine!May my eyes be gladdened and filled with intoxication by His Message! 
“MY BODY IS LIKE THE MOON” 
My body is like the moon which is melting for Love,My heart like Zuhra’s lute — may its strings be broken!Look not on the moon’s waning nor on Zuhra’s broken state:Behold the sweetness of his affection — may it wax a thousandfold! 
MORTALITY AND IMMORTALITY 
What a Bride is in the soul! By the reflection of Her faceMay the world be freshened and coloured like the hands of the newly married!Look not on the fleshy cheek which corrupts and decays,Look on the spiritual cheek — may it be sweet and agreeable!The dark body resembles a raven, and the body’s world winter;O in spite of these two unpleasants may there be Eternal Spring! 
THE BELOVED THE DIVINE CONSOLER 
Thou who art my soul’s comfort in the season of sorrow,Thou who art my spirit’s treasure in the bitterness of dearth!That which the imagination has not conceived, that which the understanding has not seen,Visited my soul from Thee; hence in worship I turn toward Thee.By Thy grace I keep fixed on Eternity my amorous gaze,Except, O King, the pomps that perish lead me astray.The favour of that one, who brings glad tidings of Thee,Even without Thy summons, is sweeter in mine ear than songs. 
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * If a never-ceasing bounty should offer kingdoms,If a hidden treasure should set before me all that is,I would bend down my soul, I would lay my face in the dust,I would say, “Of all these the love of such an One for me!” 
“THOU ART THE SOUL OF THE WORLD” 
Eternal Life, methinks, is the time of Union,Because Time, for me, hath no place There.Life is the vessels, Union the clear draught in them;Without Thee what does the pain of the vessels avail me?I had twenty thousand desires ere this;In passion for Him not even (care of) my safety remained.By the help of His grace I am become safe, becauseThe unseen King saith to me, “Thou art the soul of the world.” 
“THE VOICE OF LOVE” 
Every moment the voice of Love is coming from left and right.We are bound for heaven: who has a mind to sight-seeing?We have been in heaven, we have been friends of the angels;Thither, Sire, let us return, for that is our country. 
THE SEA OF LOVE 
Mankind, like waterfowl, are sprung from the sea — the Sea of Soul;Risen from that Sea, why should the bird make here his home?Nay, we are pearls in that Sea, therein we all abide;Else, why does wave follow wave from the Sea of Soul?’Tis the time of Union’s attainment, ’tis the time of Eternity’s beauty,’Tis the time of favour and largesse, ’tis the Ocean of perfect purity.The billow of largesse hath appeared, the thunder of the Sea hath arrived,The morn of blessedness hath dawned. Morn? No, ’tis the Light of God. 
THE BEAUTY OF THE BELOVED 
O Beloved, spiritual beauty is very fair and glorious,But Thine own beauty and loveliness is another thing.O Thou who art years describing Spirit,Show one quality that is equal to His Essence.Light waxes in the eye at the imagination of Him,But in presence of His Union it is dimmed.I stand open-mouthed in veneration of that beauty:“God is most great” is on my heart’s lips every moment.The heart hath gotten an eye constant in desire of Thee.O how that desire feeds heart and eye!’Tis slave-caressing Thy Love has practised;Else, where is the heart worthy of that Love?Every heart that has slept one night in Thy airIs like radiant day. 
THE WATER OF ETERNAL LIFE 
Every form you see has its archetype in the placeless world;If the form perished, no matter, since its Original is everlasting.Every fair shape you have seen, every deep saying you have heard,Be not cast down that it perished; for that is not so.Whereas the Spring-head is undying, its branch gives water continually;Since neither can cease, why are you lamenting?Conceive the Soul as a fountain, and these created things as rivers:While the Fountain flows, the rivers run from it.Put grief out of your head and keep quaffing this River-water;Do not think of the Water failing, for this Water is without end. 
EARTHLY LOVE AND THE LOVE DIVINE 
‘Twere better that the spirit which wears not true Love as a garmentHad not been: its being is but shame. 
* * * * * * * *¨* * * * * * * 
Without the dealing of Love there is no entrance to the Beloved. 
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * 
’Tis Love and the Lover that live to all Eternity;Set not thy heart on aught else; ’tis only borrowed,How long wilt thou embrace a dead beloved?Embrace the Soul which is embraced by nothing.What was born of spring dies in autumn,Love’s rose-plot hath no aiding from the early spring. 
“THE HOUSE OF LOVE” 
This is the Lord of Heaven, who resembles Venus and the moon,This is the House of Love, which has no bound or end.Like a mirror, the soul has received Thy image in its heart;The tip of Thy curl has sunk into my heart like a comb.Forasmuch as the women cut their hands in Joseph’s presence,Come to me, O soul, for the Beloved is in the midst. 
LOVE’S DESIRE 
Show Thy face, for I desire the orchard and the rose-garden;Ope Thy lips, for I desire sugar in plenty.O sun, show forth Thy face from the veil of cloud,For I desire that radiant glowing countenance. 
THE FINDING OF THE BELOVED 
I was on that day when the Names were not,Nor any sign of existence endowed with name,By me Names and Named were brought to viewOn the day when there was not “I” and “We,”For a sign, the tip of the Beloved’s curl became a centre of revelation;As yet the tip of that curl was not.Cross and Christians, from end to end,I surveyed; He was not on the Cross.I went to the idol-temple, to the ancient pagoda;No trace was visible there.I went to the mountains of Herāt and Candahār;I looked; He was not in that hill-and-dale. 
* * * * * * * *¨* * * * * * * 
I gazed into my own heart;There I saw Him; He was nowhere else. 
GOD ONLY 
“None but God has contemplated the beauty of God.”This eye and that lamp are two lights, each individual,When they came together, no one distinguished them. 
THE MOON-SOUL AND THE SEA 
At morning-tide a moon appeared in the sky,And descended from the sky and gazed on me.Like a falcon which snatches a bird at the time of hunting,That moon snatched me up and coursed over the sky.When I looked at myself, I saw myself no more,Because in that moon my body became by grace even as soul.When I travelled in soul, I saw naught save the moon,Till the secret of the Eternal Theophany was revealed.The nine spheres of heaven were all merged in that moon,The vessel of my being was completely hidden in the sea.The sea broke into waves, and again Wisdom roseAnd cast abroad a voice; so it happened and thus it befell.Foamed the sea, and at every foam-fleckSomething took figure and something was bodied forth.Every foam-fleck of body, which received a sign from that sea,Melted straightway and turned to spirit in this Ocean. 
LIFE IN DEATH 
When my bier moveth on the day of Death,Think not my heart is in this world.Do not weep in the devil’s snare: that is woe.When thou seest my hearse, cry not “Parted, parted!”Union and meeting are mine in that hour.If thou commit me to the grave, say not “Farewell, farewell!”For the grave is a curtain hiding the communion of Paradise,After beholding descent, consider resurrection;Why should setting be injurious to the sun and moon?To thee it seems a setting, but ’tis a rising;Tho’ the vault seems a prison, ’tis the release of the soul. 
* * * * * * * *¨* * * * * * * 
Shut thy mouth on this side and open it beyond,For in placeless air will be thy triumphal song. 
THE WHOLE AND THE PART 
Beware! do not keep, in a circle of reprobates,Thine eye shut like a bud, thy mouth open like the rose.The world resembles a mirror: thy Love is the perfect image:O people, who has ever seen a part greater than the whole? 
THE DIVINE FRIEND 
Look on me, for thou art my companion in the graveOn the night when thou shalt pass from shop and dwelling.Thou shalt hear my hail in the hollow of the tomb: it shall become known to theeThat thou wast never concealed from mine eye.I am as reason and intellect within thy bosomAt the time of joy and gladness, at the time of sorrow and distress. 
* * * * * * * *¨* * * * * * * 
In the hour when the intellectual lamp is lighted,What a pears goes up from the dead men in the tombs! 
ASPIRATION 
Haste, haste! for we too, O soul, are comingFrom this world of severance to that world of Union.O how long shall we, like children, in the earthly sphereFill our lap with dust and stones and sherds?Let us give up the earth and fly heavenwards,Let us flee from childhood to the banquet of men.Behold how the earthly frame has entrapped thee!Rend the sack and raise thy head clear. 
“I WELL CHERISH THE SOUL” 
“I am a painter, a maker of pictures; every moment I shape a beauteous form,And then in Thy presence I melt them all away.I call up a hundred phantoms and indue them with a spirit;When I behold Thy phantom, I cast them in the fire.” 
* * * * * * * *¨* * * * * * * 
Lo! I will cherish the soul, because it has a perfume of Thee.Every drop of blood which proceeds from me is saying to Thy dust:“I am one colour with Thy love, I am a partner of Thy affection.”In the house of water and clay this heart is desolate without Thee;O Beloved, enter the house, or I will leave it. 
“THIS IS LOVE” 
This is Love: to fly heavenward,To rend, every instant, a hundred veils.The first moment, to renounce Life:The last step, to feel without feet.To regard this world as invisible,Not to see what appears to one’s self.“O heart,” I said, “may it bless theeTo have entered the circle of lovers,To look beyond the range of the eye,To penetrate the windings of the bosom!Whence did this breath come to thee, O my soul,Whence this throbbing, O my heart?” 
THE JOURNEY TO THE BELOVED 
O lovers, O lovers, it is time to abandon the world:The drum of departure reaches my spiritual ear from heaven.Behold, the driver has risen and made ready his files of camels,And begged us to acquit him of blame: why, O travellers, are you asleep?These sounds before and behind are the din of departure and of the camel-bells;With each moment a soul and spirit is setting off into the Void.From these inverted candles, from these blue awningsThere has come forth a wondrous people, that the mysteries may be revealed.A heavy slumber fell upon thee from the circling spheres:Alas, for this life so light, beware of this slumber so heavy!O soul, seek the Beloved, O friend, seek the Friend,O watchman, be wakeful: it behoves not a watchman to sleep. 
THE DAY OF RESURRECTION 
On every side is clamour and tumult, in every street are candles and torches,For to-night the teeming world gives birth to the World Everlasting.Thou wert dust and art spirit, thou wert ignorant and art wise.He who has led thee thus far will lead thee further also.How pleasant are the pains He makes thee suffer while He gently draws thee to Himself! 
THE RETURN OF THE BELOVED 
Always at night returns the Beloved: do not eat opium to-night;Close your mouth against food, that you may taste the sweetness of the mouth.Lo, the cup-bearer is no tyrant, and in his assembly there is a circle:Come into the circle, be seated; how long will you regard the revolution (of Time)? 
* * * * * * * *¨* * * * * * * 
Why, when God’s earth is so wide, have you fallen asleep in a prison?Avoid entangled thoughts, that you may see the explanation of Paradise.Refrain from speaking, that you may win speech hereafter.Abandon life and the world, that you may behold the Life of the world. 
THE CALL OF THE BELOVED 
Every morning a voice comes to thee from heaven:“When thou lay’st the dust of the way, thou win’st thy way to the goal.”On the road to the Ka’ba of Union, lo, in every thorn-bushAre thousands slain of desire who manfully yielded up their lives.Thousands sank wounded on this path, to whom there came notA breath of the fragrance of Union, a token from the neighbourhood of the Friend. 
“THE BANQUET OF UNION” 
In memory of the banquet of Union, in yearning for His beautyThey are fallen bewildered by the wine Thou knowest.How sweet, in the hope of Him, on the threshold of His Abode,For the sake of seeing His face, to bring night round to day!Illumine thy bodily senses by the Light of the soul: 
* * * * * * * *¨* * * * * * * 
Look not in the world for bliss and fortune, since thou wilt not find them;Seek bliss in both worlds by serving Him,Put away the tale of Love that travellers tell;Do thou serve God with all thy might. 
“BE SILENT” 
Be silent that the Lord who gave thee language may speak,For as He fashioned a door and lock, He has also made a key. 
“THOU DIDST GO TO THE ROSE-GARDEN” 
At last thou hast departed and gone to the Unseen;’Tis marvellous by what way thou wentest from the world.Thou didst strongly shake thy wings and feathers, and having broken thy cageDidst take to the air and journey towards the world of Soul.Thou wert a favourite falcon, kept in captivity by an old woman:When thou heard’st the falcon-drum thou didst fly away into the Void.Thou wert a love-lorn nightingale among owls:The scent of the Rose-Garden, reached thee, and thou didst go to the Rose-Garden. 
“THE WORLD GAVE THEE FALSE CLUES” 
The world gave thee false clues, like a ghoul:Thou took’st no heed of the clue, but wentest to that which is without a clue.Since thou art now the sun, why dost thou wear a tiara?Why seek a girdle, since thou art gone from the middle?I have heard that thou art gazing with distorted eyes upon thy soul:Why dost thou gaze on thy soul, since thou art gone to the Soul of soul?O heart, what a wondrous bird art thou, that in chase of divine rewardsThou didst fly with two wings to the spear-point, like a shield!The rose flees from autumn — O what a fearless rose art thou,Who didst go loitering along in the presence of the autumn wind!Falling like rain from heaven upon the roof of the terrestrial worldThou didst run in every direction till thou didst escape by conduit.Be silent and free from the pain of speech: do not slumber,Since thou hast taken refuge with so loving a Friend. 
“HE COMES” 
He comes, a moon whose like the sky ne’er saw, awake or dreaming,Crowned with Eternal Flame no flood can lay.Lo, from the flagon of Thy Love, O Lord, my soul is swimming,And ruined all my body’s house of clay!When first the Giver of the grape my lonely heart befriended,Wine fired my bosom and my veins filled up,But when His image all mine eye possessed, a voice descended:“Well done, O sovereign Wine and peerless Cup!”Love’s mighty arm from roof to base each dark abode is hewingWhere chinks reluctant catch a golden ray.My heart, when Love’s sea of a sudden burst into its viewing,Leaped headlong in, with “Find me now who may!” 
“THE ROAD BE THINE TOWARDS THE SHRINE” 
O honoured guest in Love’s high feast, O bird of the angel-sphere,’Tis cause to weep, if thou wilt keep thy habitation here.A voice at morn to thee is borne — God whispers to the soul — “If on the way the dust thou lay, thou soon wilt gain the goal.”The road be thine toward the Shrine! and lo, in bush and briar,The many slain of Love and pain in flower of young desire,Who on the track fell wounded back and saw not, ere the end,A ray of bliss, a touch, a kiss, a token of the Friend! 
THY ROSE 
Our Sweetnesses all bleat in Thee,Give infant lips their smiles benign.Thou crushest me to drops of RoseNor ‘neath the press do I repine.In Thy sweet Pain is pain forgot;For I, Thy Rose, had this design.Thou bad’st me blossom on Thy Robe,And mad’st me for all eyes Thy sign.And when Thou pour’st me on the world,It blows in beauty, all Divine. 
“I SAW THE WINTER WEAVING” 
I saw the winter weaving from flakes a robe of Death;And the spring found earth in mourning, all naked, lone, and bare.I heard Time’s loom a-whirring that wove the Sun’s dim Veil;I saw a worm a-weaving in Life-threads its own lair.I saw the Great was Smallest, and saw the Smallest Great;For God had set His likeness on all the things that were. 
“LOVE SOUNDS THE MUSIC OF THE SPHERES” 
O, soul, if thou, too, wouldst be free,Then love the Love that shuts thee in.’Tis Love that twisteth every snare;’Tis Love that snaps the bond of sin;Love sounds the Music of the Spheres;Love echoes through Earth’s harshest din. 
* * * * * * * *¨* * * * * * * 
The world is God’s pure mirror clear,To eyes when free from clouds within.With Love’s own eyes the Mirror view,And there see God to self akin. 
“THE SOULS LOVE-MOVED” 
The souls love-moved are circling on,Like streams to their great Ocean King.Thou art the Sun of all men’s thoughts;Thy kisses are the flowers of spring.The dawn is pale from yearning Love;The moon in tears is sorrowing.Thou art the Rose, and deep for Thee,In sighs, the nightingales still sing. 
THE BELOVED ALL IN ALL 
My Soul sends up to Heaven each night the cry of Love!God’s starry Beauty draws with might the cry of Love!Bright sun and moon each morn dance in my Heart at Dawn:And waking me at daylight, excite the cry of Love!On every meadow glancing, I see God’s sun-beams play;And all Creation’s wonders excite the cry of Love! 
* * * * * * * *¨* * * * * * * 
I, All in All becoming, now clear see God in All;And up from Union yearning, takes flight the cry of Love! 
“THOU AND I” 
Happy the moment when we are seated in the Palace, thou and I,With two forms and with two figures but with one soul, thou and I.The colours of the grove and the voice of the birds will bestow immortalityAt the time when we come into the garden, thou and I.The stars of heaven will come to gaze upon us;We shall show them the moon itself, thou and I.Thou and I, individuals no more, shall be mingled in ecstasy,Joyful, and secure from foolish babble, thou and I.All the bright-plumed birds of heaven will devour their hearts with envyIn the place where we shall laugh in such a fashion, thou and I.This is the greatest wonder, that thou and I, sitting here in the same nook,Are at this moment both in Irāq and Khorasan, thou and I. 
The celestial Venus, and leader of the starry choirs to music. See R. A. Nicholson’s note in Selected Poems from the Dīvāni Shamsi Tabrīz. 
A design traced in henna. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





SELECTIONS FROM THE “MASNAVI” 
SORROW QUENCHED IN THE BELOVED 
Through grief my days are as labour and sorrow,My days move on, hand in hand with anguish.Yet, though my days vanish thus, ’tis no matter,Do Thou abide, O Incomparable Pure One. 
THE MUSIC OF LOVE 
Hail to thee, then, O LOVE, sweet madness!Thou who healest all our infirmities!Who art the Physician of our pride and self conceit!Who art our Plato and our Galen!Love exalts our earthly bodies to heaven,And makes the very hills to dance with joy!O lover, ’twas Love that gave life to Mount Sinai,When “it quaked, and Moses fell down in a swoon.”Did my Beloved only touch me with His lips,I too, like a flute, would burst out into melody. 
“WHEN THE ROSE HAS FADED” 
When the rose has faded and the garden is withered,The song of the nightingale is no longer to be heard.The BELOVED is all in all, the lover only veils Him;The BELOVED is all that lives, the lover a dead thing.When the lover feels no longer LOVE’S quickening,He becomes like a bird who has lost its wings. Alas!How can I retain my senses about me,When the BELOVED shows not the Light of His countenance? 
THE SILENCE OF LOVE 
Love is the astrolabe of God’s mysteries.A lover may hanker after this love or that love,But at the last he is drawn to the KING of Love.However much we describe and explain Love,When we fall in love we are ashamed of our words.Explanation by the tongue makes most things clear,But Love unexplained is better. 
EARTHLY LOVE ESSENTIAL TO THE LOVE DIVINE 
In one ’twas said, “Leave power and weakness alone;Whatever withdraws thine eyes from God is an idol.”In one ’twas said, “Quench not thy earthy torch,That it may be a light to lighten mankind.If thou neglectest regard and care for it,Thou wilt quench at midnight the lamp of Union.” 
THE ETERNAL SPLENDOUR OF THE BELOVED 
Why dost Thou flee from the cries of us on earth?Why pourest Thou sorrow on the heart of the sorrowful?O Thou who, as each new morn dawns from the east,Art seen uprising anew, like a bright fountain!What excuse makest Thou for Thy witcheries?O Thou whose lips are sweeter than sugar,Thou that ever renewest the life of this old world,Hear the cry of this lifeless body and heart! 
WOMAN 
Woman is a ray of God, not a mere mistress,The Creator’s Self, as it were, not a mere creature! 
THE DIVINE UNION 
Mustafa became beside himself at that sweet call,His prayer failed on “the night of the early morning halt.”He lifted not head from that blissful sleep,So that his morning prayer was put off till noon.On that, his wedding night, in the presence of his bride,His pure soul attained to kiss her hands.Love and mistress are both veiled and hidden.Impute it not a fault if I call Him “Bride.” 
“HE KNOWS ABOUT IT ALL” 
He who is from head to foot a perfect rose or lily,To him spring brings rejoicing.The useless thorn desires the autumn,That autumn may associate itself with the garden;And hide the rose’s beauty and the thorn’s shame,That men may not see the bloom of the one and the other’s shame;That common stone and pure ruby may appear all as one.True, the Gardener knows the difference in the autumn,But the sight of One is better than the world’s sight. 
RESIGNATION THE WAY TO PERFECTION 
Whoso recognises and confesses his own defectsIs hastening in the way that leads to Perfection!But he advances not towards the AlmightyWho fancies himself to be perfect. 
LOVE THE SOURCE OF LIGHT RATHER THAN VANISHING FORM 
Whatsoever is perceived by sense He annuls,But He stablishes that which is hidden from the senses.The lover’s love is visible, his Beloved hidden.The Friend is absent, the distraction He causes present.Renounce these affections for outward forms,Love depends not on outward form or face.Whatever is beloved is not a mere empty form,Whether your beloved be of the earth or heaven.Whatever is the form you have fallen in love with — Why do you forsake it the moment life leaves it?The form is still there; whence then this disgust at it?Ah! lover, consider well what is really your beloved.If a thing perceived by outward senses is the beloved,Then all who retain their senses must still love it;And since Love increases constancy,How can constancy fail while form abides?But the truth is, the sun’s beams strike the wall,And the wall only reflects that borrowed light.Why give your heart to mere stones, O simpleton?Go! Seek the Source of Light which shineth alway! 
THE RELIGION OF LOVE 
The sect of lovers is distinct from all others,Lovers have a religion and a faith of their own.Though the ruby has no stamp, what matters it?Love is fearless in the midst of the sea of fear. 
“PAIN IS A TREASURE!” 
Pain is a treasure, for it contains mercies;The kernel is soft when the rind is scraped off.O brother, the place of darkness and coldIs the fountain of Life and the cup of ecstasy.So also is endurance of pain and sickness and disease.For from abasement proceeds exaltation.The spring seasons are hidden in the autumns,And the autumns are charged with springs. 
SPIRIT GREATER THAN FORM 
If spiritual manifestations had been sufficient,The creation of the world had been needless and vain.If spiritual thought were equivalent to love of God,Outward forms of temples and prayers would not exist. 
THE BELOVED COMPARED TO “A SWEET GARDEN” 
“We bow down our heads before His edict and ordinance,We stake precious life to gain His favour.While the thought of the Beloved fills our hearts,All our work is to do Him service and spend life for Him.Wherever He kindles His destructive torch,Myriads of lovers’ souls are burnt therewith.The lovers who dwell within the sanctuaryAre moths burnt with the torch of the Beloved’s face.”O heart, haste thither, for God will shine upon you,And seem to you a sweet garden instead of a terror.He will infuse into your soul a new Soul,So as to fill you, like a goblet, with wine.Take up your abode in His Soul!Take up your abode in heaven, O bright full moon!Like the heavenly Scribe, He will open your heart’s bookThat He may reveal mysteries unto you. 
“BEHOLD THE WATER OF WATERS!” 
The sea itself is one thing, the foam another;Neglect the foam, and regard the sea with your eyes.Waves of foam rise from the sea night and day.You look at the foam ripples and not at the mighty sea.We, like boats, are tossed hither and thither,We are blind though we are on the bright ocean.Ah! you who are asleep in the boat of the body,You see the water; behold the Water of waters!Under the water you see there is another Water moving it.Within the spirit is a Spirit that calls it. 
* * * * * * * *¨* * * * * * * 
When you have accepted the Light, O beloved,When you behold what is veiled without a veil,Like a star you will walk upon the heavens. 
WHERE LOVE IS 
A damsel said to her lover, “O fond youth,You have visited many cities in your travels;Which of those cities seems most delightful to you?”He made answer, “The city wherein my love dwells,In whatever nook my queen alights;Though it be as the eye of a needle, ’tis a wide plain;Wherever her Yusuf-like face shines as a moon,Though it be the bottom of a well, ’tis Paradise.With thee, my love, hell itself were heaven.With thee a prison would be a rose-garden.With thee hell would be a mansion of delight,Without thee lilies and roses would be as flames of fire!” 
THE LOVE OF THE BELOVED 
No lover ever seeks union with his beloved,But his beloved is also seeking union with him.But the lover’s love makes his body lean,While the Beloved’s love makes her fair and lusty.When in this heart the lightning spark of love arises,Be sure this Love is reciprocated in that heart.When the Love of God arises in thy heart,Without doubt God also feels love for thee. 
THE LOVE OF THE SOUL AND THE LOVE OF THE BODY 
The Love of the soul is for Life and the Living One,Because its origin is the Soul not bound to place.The Love of the soul is for wisdom and knowledge,That of the body for houses, gardens, and vine-yards;The love of the soul is for things exalted on high,That of the body for acquisition of goods and food.The Love, too, of Him on high is directed to the soul:Know this, for “He loves them that love Him.”The sum is this: that whoso seeks another,The soul of that other who is sought inclines to him. 
“O LOVE, LOVE, AND HEART’S DESIRE OF LOVE!” 
Israfil of the resurrection-day of Love!Love, Love, and heart’s desire of Love!Let thy first boon to me be this:To lend thine ear to my orisons,Though thou knowest my condition clearly,O protector of slaves, listen to my speech.A thousand times, O prince incomparable,Has my reason taken flight in desire to see thee,And to hear thee and to listen to thy words,And to behold thy life-giving smiles.Thy inclining thine ear to my supplicationsIs as a caress to my misguided soul. 
DESTROY NOT EARTHLY BEAUTY: IT BEAUTIFIES THE SOUL 
Tear not thy plumage off, it cannot be replaced;Disfigure not thy face in wantonness, O fair one!That face which is bright as the forenoon sun — To disfigure it were a grievous sin.‘Twere paganism to mar such a face as thineThe moon itself would weep to lose sight of it!Knowest thou not the beauty of thine own face?Quit this temper that leads thee to war with thyself!It is the claws of thine own foolish thoughtsThat in spite wound the face of thy quiet soul.Know such thoughts to be claws fraught with poison.Which score deep wounds on the face of thy soul. 
THE DEVIL MAKES USE OF THE BEAUTY OF WOMEN 
Thus spake cursed Iblis to the Almighty,“I want a mighty trap to catch human game withal!”God gave him gold and silver and troops and horses,Saying, “You can catch my creatures with these.”Iblis said, “Bravo!” but at the same time hung his lip,And frowned sourly like a bitter orange.Then God offered gold and jewels from precious minesTo that laggard in the faith,Saying, “Take these other traps, O cursed one.”But Iblis said, “Give me more, O blessed Defender.”God gave him succulent and sweet and costly wines,And also store of silken garments.But Iblis said, “O Lord, I want more aids than these,In order to bind men in my twisted ropeSo firmly that Thy adorers, who are valiant men,May not, man-like, break my bonds asunder.” 
* * * * * * * *¨* * * * * * * 
When at last God showed him the beauty of women,Which bereaves men of reason and self-control,Then Iblis clapped his hands and began to dance,Saying, “Give me these; I shall quickly prevail with these!” 
“LOVERS AND BELOVED HAVE BOTH PERISHED” 
Lovers and beloved have both perished;And not themselves only, but their love as well.’Tis God alone who agitates these nonentities,Making one nonentity fall in love with another.In the heart that is no heart envy comes to a head,Thus Being troubles nonentity. 
“O ANGELS, BRING HIM BACK TO ME” 
“O angels, bring him back to me.Since the eyes of his heart were set on Hope,Without care for consequence I set him free,And draw the pen through the record of his sins!” 
SELF-AGGRANDISEMENT AND VAINGLORY NO PART OF LOVE 
A lover was once admitted to the presence of his mistress, but, instead of embracing her, he pulled out a paper of sonnets and read them to her, describing her perfections and charms and his own love towards her at length. His mistress said to him, “You are now in my presence, and these lovers’ sighs and invocations are a waste of time. It is not the part of a true lover to waste his time in this way. It shows that I am not the real object of your affection, but that what you really love is your own effusions and ecstatic raptures. I see, as it were, the water which I have longed for before me, and yet you withhold it. I am, as it were, in Bulgaria, and the object of your love is in Cathay. One who is really loved is the single object of her lover, the Alpha and Omega of his desires. As for you, you are wrapped up in your own amorous raptures, depending on the varying states of your own feelings, instead of being wrapped up in me.” 
“I AM THINE, AND THOU ART MINE!” 
Eternal Life is gained by utter abandonment of one’s own life. When God appears to His ardent lover the lover is absorbed in Him, and not so much as a hair of the lover remains. True lovers are as shadows, and when the sun shines in glory the shadows vanish away. He is a true lover to God to whom God says, “I am thine, and thou art Mine!” 
LOVE NEEDS NO MEDIATOR 
When one has attained Union with God he has no need of intermediaries. Prophets and apostles are needed as links to connect ordinary man with God, but he who hears the “inner voice” within him has no need to listen to outward words, even of apostles. Although that intercession is himself dwelling in God, yet my state is higher and more lovely than his. Though he is God’s agent, yet I desire not his intercession to save me from evil sent me by God, for evil at God’s hand seems to me good. What seems mercy and kindness to the vulgar seems wrath and vengeance to God-intoxicated saints. 
HUMANITY THE REFLECTION OF THE BELOVED 
Parrots are taught to speak without understanding the words. The method is to place a mirror between the parrot and the trainer. The trainer, hidden by the mirror, utters the words, and the parrot, seeing his own reflection in the mirror, fancies another parrot is speaking, and imitates all that is said by the trainer behind the mirror. So God uses prophets and saints as mirrors whereby to instruct men, viz., the bodies of these saints and prophets; and men, when they hear the words proceeding from these mirrors, are utterly ignorant that they are really being spoken by “Universal Reason” or the “Word of God” behind the mirror of the saints. 
“EARTHLY FORMS” 
Earthly forms are only shadows of the Sun of Truth — a cradle for babes, but too small to hold those who have grown to spiritual manhood. 
“THE BEATIFIC VISION OF ETERNAL TRUTH” 
The end and object of all negation is to attain to subsequent affirmation, as the negation in the creed, “There is no God,” finds its complement and purpose in the affirmation “but God.” Just so the purpose of negation of self is to clear the way for the apprehension of the fact that there is no existence but the One. The intoxication of Life and its pleasures and occupations veils the Truth from men’s eyes, and they ought to pass on to the spiritual intoxication which makes men beside themselves and lifts them to the beatific vision of eternal Truth. 
THE WINE EVERLASTING 
O babbler, while thy soul is drunk with mere date wine,Thy spirit hath not tasted the genuine grapes.For the token of thy having seen that divine LightIs this, to withdraw thyself from the house of pride. 
BE LOST IN THE BEAUTY OF THE BELOVED 
When those Egyptian women sacrificed their reason,They penetrated the mansion of Joseph’s love;The Cup-bearer of Life bore away their reason,They were filled with wisdom of the world without end.Joseph’s beauty was only an offshoot of God’s beauty:Be lost, then, in God’s beauty more than those women. 
“WHAT EAR HAS TOLD YOU FALSELY” 
What ear has told you falsely eye will tell truly.Then ear, too, will acquire the properties of an eye;Your ears, now worthless as wool, will become gems;Yea, your whole body will become a mirror,It will be as an eye of a bright gem in your bosom.First the hearing of the ear enables you to form ideas,Then these ideas guide you to the Beloved.Strive, then, to increase the number of these ideas,That they may guide you, like Majnun, to the Beloved. 
“THERE IS A PLACE OF REFUGE” 
Yea, O sleeping heart, know the kingdom that endures notFor ever and ever is only a mere dream.I marvel how long you will indulge in vain illusion,Which has seized you by the throat like a heads man.Know that even in this world there is a place of refuge;Hearken not to the unbeliever who denies it.His argument is this: he says again and again,“If there were aught beyond this life we should see it.”But if the child see not the state of reason,Does the man of reason therefore forsake reason?And if the man of reason sees not the state of Love,Is the blessed moon of Love thereby eclipsed? 
THE LOVER’S CRY TO THE BELOVED 
“My back is broken by the conflict of my thoughts;O Beloved One, come and stroke my head in mercy!The palm of Thy hand on my head gives me rest,Thy hand is a sign of Thy bounteous providence.Remove not Thy shadow from my head,I am afflicted, afflicted, afflicted!Sleep has deserted my eyesThrough my longing for Thee, O Envy of cypresses! 
* * * * * * * *¨* * * * * * * 
O take my life, Thou art the Source of Life!For apart from Thee I am wearied of my life.I am a lover well versed in lovers’ madness,I am weary of learning and sense.” 
SORROW TURNED TO JOY 
“He who extracts the rose from the thornCan also turn this winter into spring.He who exalts the heads of the cypressesIs able also out of sadness to bring joy.” 
THE GIFTS OF THE BELOVED 
Where will you find one more liberal than God?He buys the worthless rubbish which is your wealth,He pays you the Light that illumines your heart.He accepts these frozen and lifeless bodies of yours,And gives you a Kingdom beyond what you dream of,He takes a few drops of your tears,And gives you the Divine Fount sweeter than sugar.He takes your sighs fraught with grief and sadness,And for each sigh gives rank in heaven as interest.In return for the sigh-wind that raised tear-clouds,God gave Abraham the title of “Father of the Faithful.” 
“THOU ART HIDDEN FROM US” 
Thou art hidden from us, though the heavens are filledWith Thy Light, which is brighter than sun and moon!Thou art hidden, yet revealest our hidden secretsThou art the Source that causes our rivers to flow.Thou art hidden in Thy essence, but seen by Thy bounties.Thou art like the water, and we like the mill-stone.Thou art like the wind, and we like the dust;The wind is unseen, but the dust is seen by all.Thou art the Spring, and we the sweet green garden;Spring is not seen, though its gifts are seen.Thou art as the Soul, we as hand and foot;Soul instructs hand and foot to hold and take.Thou art as Reason, we like the tongue;’Tis reason that teaches the tongue to speak.Thou art as Joy, and we are laughing;The laughter is the consequence of the joy.Our every motion every moment testifies,For it proves the presence of the Everlasting God. 
“EXERT YOURSELVES” 
“‘Trust in God, yet tie the camel’s leg.’Hear the adage, ‘The worker is the friend of God;’Through trust in Providence neglect not to use means.Go, O Fatalists, practise trust with self-exertion,Exert yourself to attain your objects, bit by bit.In order to succeed, strive and exert yourselves;If you strive not for your objects, ye are fools.” 
THE WISDOM OF THE WEAK 
“O friends, God has given me inspiration.Oftentimes strong counsel is suggested to the weak.The wit taught by God to the beeIs withheld from the lion and the wild ass.It fills its cells with liquid sweets,For God opens the door of this knowledge to it.The skill taught by God to the silkwormIs a learning beyond the reach of the elephant.The earthly Adam was taught of God names,So that his glory reached the seventh heaven.He laid low the name and fame of the angels,Yet blind indeed are they whom God dooms to doubt!” 
WHITE NIGHTS 
Every night Thou freest our spirits from the bodyAnd its snare, making them pure as rased tablets.Every night spirits are released from this cage,And set free, neither lording it nor lorded over.At night prisoners are unaware of their prison,At night kings are unaware of their majesty. 
“THE KINGLY SOUL” 
The kingly soul lays waste the body,And after its destruction he builds it anew.Happy the soul who for love of GodHas lavished family, wealth, and goods! — Has destroyed its house to find the Hidden Treasure,And with that Treasure has rebuilt it in fairer sort;Has dammed up the stream and cleansed the channel,And then turned a fresh stream into the channel. 
SAINT AND HYPOCRITE 
Watch the face of each one, regard it well,It may be by serving thou wilt recognise Truth’s face.As there are many demons with men’s faces,It is wrong to join hand with every one.When the fowler sounds his decoy whistle,That the birds may be beguiled by that snare,The birds hear that call simulating a bird’s call,And, descending from the air, find net and knife.So vile hypocrites steal the language of Dervishes,In order to beguile the simple with their trickery.The works of the righteous are light and heat,The works of the evil treachery and shamelessness.They make stuffed lions to scare the simple,They give the title of Muhammad to false Musailima.But Musailima retained the name of “Liar,”And Muhammad that of “Sublimest of beings.”That wine of God (the righteous) yields a perfume of musk;Other wine (the evil) is reserved for penalties and pains. 
HARSHNESS AND ADORATION 
Let me then, I say, make complaintOf the severity of that Fickle Fair One.I cry, and my cries sound sweet in His ear;He requires from the two worlds cries and groans.How shall I not wail under His chastening hand?How shall I not be in the number of those bewitched by Him?How shall I be other than night without His day?Without the vision of His face that illumes the day?His bitters are very sweets to my soul,I am enamoured of my own grief and pain,For it makes me well-pleasing to my peerless KingI use the dust of my grief as salve for my eyes,That my eyes, like seas, may team with pearls. 
THE DIVINE ABSORPTION 
Do me justice, O Thou who art the glory of the just,Who art the throne, and I the lintel of Thy door!But, in sober truth, where are throne and door-way?Where are “We” and “I”? There where our Beloved is!O Thou, who art exempt from “Us” and “Me,”Who pervadest the spirits of all men and women;When man and woman become one, Thou art that One!When their union is dissolved, lo! Thou abidest!Thou hast made these “Us” and “Me” for this purpose,To wit, to play chess with them by Thyself.When Thou shalt become one entity with “Us” and “You,”Then wilt Thou show true affection for these lovers.When these “We” and “Ye” shall all become One Soul,Then they will be lost and absorbed in the “Beloved.” 
LOVE MORE THAN SORROW AND JOY 
Come then, O Lord!Who art exalted above description and explanation!Is it possible for the bodily eye to behold Thee?Can mind of man conceive Thy frowns and Thy smiles?Are hearts, when bewitched by Thy smiles and frowns,In a fit state to see the vision of Thyself?When our hearts are bewitched by Thy smiles and frowns,Can we gain Life from these two alternating states?The fertile garden of Love, as it is boundless,Contains other fruits besides joy and sorrow.The true lover is exalted above these two states,He is fresh and green independently of autumn or spring!Pay tithe on Thy beauty, O Beauteous One!Tell forth the tale of the Beloved, every whit! 
“THE HEART OF THE HARPER” 
The heart of the harper was emancipated.Like a soul he was freed from weeping and rejoicing,His old life died, and he was regenerated.Amazement fell upon him at that moment,For he was exalted above earth and heaven,An uplifting of the heart surpassing all uplifting.I cannot describe it; if you can, say on!Ecstasy and words beyond all ecstatic words; — Immersion in the glory of the Lord of glory!Immersion wherefrom was no extrication, — As it were identification with the Very Ocean! 
“WHEN NIGHT RETURNS” 
When night returns and ’tis the time of the sky’s levée,The stars that were hidden come forth to their work.The people of the world lie unconscious,With veils drawn over their faces, and asleep;But when the morn shall burst forth and the sun ariseEvery creature will raise its head from its couch;To the unconscious God will restore consciousness;They will stand in rings as slaves with rings in ears;Dancing and clapping hands with songs of praise,Singing with joy, “Our Lord hath restored us to life!” 
SEPARATION 
Nothing is bitterer than severance from Thee,Without Thy shelter there is naught but perplexity.Our worldly goods rob us of our heavenly goods,Our body rends the garment of our soul.Our hands, as it were, prey on our feet;Without reliance on Thee how can we live? 
“GOD’S LIGHT” 
’Tis God’s Light that illumines the senses’ light,That is the meaning of “Light upon light.”The senses’ light draws us earthwards.God’s Light calls us heavenwards. 
“LOVE CASTS ITS OWN LIGHT” 
When love of God kindles a flame in the inward man,He burns, and is freed from effects.He has no need of signs to assure him of Love,For Love casts its own Light up to heaven. 
“THE BELIEVER’S HEART” 
The Prophet said that God has declared,“I am not contained in aught above or below,I am not contained in earth or sky, or evenIn highest heaven. Know this for a surety, O beloved!Yet am I contained in the believer’s heart!If ye seek Me, search in such hearts!” 
“SELF-SATISFACTION” 
No sickness worse than fancying thyself perfectCan infect thy soul, O arrogant misguided one!Shed many tears of blood from eyes and heart,That this self-satisfaction may be driven out.The fate of Iblis lay in saying, “I am better than He,”And this same weakness lurks in the souls of all creatures. 
“TRUE KNOWLEDGE” 
The knowledge which is not of Him is a burden;Knowledge which comes not immediately from HimEndures no longer than the rouge of the tire-woman.Nevertheless, if you bear this burden in a right spirit‘Twill be removed, and you will obtain joy.See you bear not that burden out of vainglory,Then you will behold a store of True Knowledge within.When you mount the steed of this True Knowledge,Straightway the burden will fall from your back. 
“THE FLAME OF LOVE” 
How long wilt thou dwell on words and superficialities?A burning heart is what I want; consort with burning!Kindle in thy heart the flame of Love,And burn up utterly thoughts and fine expressions.O Moses! the lovers of fair rites are one class,They whose hearts and souls burn with Love another. 
A MOTHER WHOSE CHILDREN WERE IN THE BELOVED’S KEEPING 
A woman bore many children in succession, but none of them lived beyond the age of three or four months. In great distress she cried to God, and then beheld in a vision the beautiful gardens of Paradise, and many fair mansions therein, and upon one of these mansions she read her own name inscribed. And a voice from heaven informed her that God would accept the sorrows she had endured in lieu of her blood shed in holy war, as, owing to her sex, she was unable to go out to battle like the men. On looking again, the woman beheld in Paradise all the children she had lost, and she cried, “O Lord! they were lost to me, but safe with Thee!” 
THE OPTIMISTIC ROSE 
In this tale there is a warning for thee, O Soul,That thou mayest acquiesce in God’s ordinances,And be wary and not doubt God’s benevolence,When sudden misfortune befalls thee.Let others grow pale from fear of ill fortune,Do thou smile like the rose at loss and gain;For the rose, though its petals be torn asunder,Still smiles on, and it is never cast down. 
THE TRUE MOSQUE 
Fools laud and magnify the mosque,While they strive to oppress holy men of heart.But the former is mere form, the latter spirit and truth.The only true mosque is that in the hearts of saints.The mosque that is built in the hearts of the saintsIs the place of worship of all, for God dwells there.So long as the hearts of the saints are not afflicted.God never destroys the nation. 
“IGNORANCE” 
Blood is impure, yet its stain is removed by water;But that impurity of ignorance is more lasting,Seeing that without the blessed water of GodIt is not banished from the man who is subject to it.O that thou wouldst turn thy face to thy own prayers,And say, “Ah! my prayers are as defective as my being;O requite me good for evil!” 
A PRAYER 
“Pray in this wise and allay your difficulties:‘Give us good in the house of our present world,And give us good in the house of our next world.Make our path pleasant as a garden,And be Thou, O Holy One, our goal!’” 
ALL RELIGIONS ARE ONE 
In the adorations and benedictions of righteous menThe praises of all the prophets are kneaded together.All their praises are mingled into one stream,All the vessels are emptied into one ewer.Because He that is praised is, in fact, only One.In this respect all religions are only one religion.Because all praises are directed towards God’s Light,These various forms and figures are borrowed from it. 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





BRIEF BIOGRAPHY by Reynold A. Nicholson
 
I 
JALALU’L-DIN RUMI, the greatest mystical poet of Persia, was born at Balkh in the northern Persian province of Khorasan in A.D. 1207. The city at that time flourished under the rule of Muhammad, the great Shah of Khwarizm, whose empire, as E. G. Browne described it, “extended from the Ural Mountains to the Persian Gulf, and from the Indus almost to the Euphrates.” The family to which our poet belonged had been settled in Balkh for several generations; it was highly respected and, according to his biographers, had produced a notable succession of jurists and divines. So far as can be ascertained, its history begins with his great-grandfather, who claimed descent from Arab stock, and from no less a person than Abu Bakr, the first Caliph of Islam.
Although the Eastern biographies of Rumi, like other lives of Persian saints, are to a large extent legendary, while his own works characteristically contribute virtually nothing in the shape of historical facts, we are fortunate in possessing some old and relatively trustworthy sources of information. The following sketch, based on the chief materials available, gives briefly the main circumstances of Rumi’s life and describes some of the events which were the source of his mystical enthusiasm and poetic inspiration.
In 1219, when Jalalu’I-Din was twelve years old, his father, Baha’u’I-Din Walad, suddenly departed from Balkh with his family and journeyed westward. The motives alleged for this migration, that it was the result either of divine inspiration or human intrigue, are surely fictitious. There can be no doubt that Baha’u’I-Dln, like many thousands of others, fled before the terrible Mongol hordes, which were sweeping through Khorasan and already approaching his native city. News of its devastation reached the exiles on their way to Baghdad or on the next stage of their long journey from Baghdad to Mecca, when they travelled to Damascus and finally settled in Rum (Turkey).
Their first home was at Zarandah, about forty miles southeast of Konia, where Jalalu’I-Din married; in 1226 his eldest son Sultan Walad was born. Presently Baha’u’l-Din transferred himself and his family to Konia, at that time the capital of the Western Seljuk empire, and he died there in 1230. He is said to have been an eminent theologian, a great teacher and preacher, venerated by his pupils and highly esteemed by the reigning monarch, to whom he acted as a spiritual guide. About this time Burhanu’I-Din Muhaqqiq of Tirmidh, a former pupil of Baha’u’l-Din at Balkh, arrived in Konia. Under his influence, it is said, Jalalu’l-Din, now in his twenty-fifth year, became imbued with enthusiasm for the discipline and doctrine of the Sufis-men and women who sought to unite themselves with God. During the next decade he devoted himself to imitation of his Pir and passed through all the stages of the mystical life until, on the death of Burhanu’I-Din in 1240, he in turn assumed the rank of Shaykh and thus took the first, though probably unpremeditated, step towards forming a fraternity of the disciples whom his ardent personality attracted in ever increasing numbers.
The remainder of his life, as described by his son, falls into three periods, each of which is marked by a mystical intimacy of the closest kind with a “Perfect Man,” i.e. one of the saints in whom Divine attributes are mirrored, so that the lover, seeing himself by the light of God, realizes that he and his Beloved are not two, but One. These experiences lie at the very centre of Rumi’s theosophy and directly or indirectly inspire all his poetry. In handling the verse narrative of a mystic’s son who was himself a mystic it is prudent to make ample allowance for the element of allegory; yet it would be rash to reject the whole story as pious fiction seeing that at the date when it was written many persons were living who could say whether it was, or was not, a recognizable picture of things which they themselves had witnessed.
In 1244 a wandering dervish, known to posterity by the name of Shamsu’l-Dln of Tabriz, arrived at Konia.
Jalalu’l-Dln found in the stranger that perfect image of the Divine Beloved which he had long been seeking. He took him away to his house, and for a year or two they remained inseparable. Sultan Walad likens his father’s all-absorbing communion with this “hidden saint” to the celebrated journey of Moses in company with Khadir ( Koran, xviii, 64-80), the Sage whom Sufis regard as the supreme hierophant and guide of travellers on the Way to God.
Meanwhile the Maulawi (Mevlevi) disciples of Rumi, entirely cut off from their Master’s teaching and conversation and bitterly resenting his continued devotion to Shamsu’l-Dln alone, assailed the intruder with abuse and threats of violence. At last Shamsu’l-Din fled to Damascus, but was brought back in triumph by Sultan Walad, whom Jalalu’I-Dln, deeply agitated by the loss of his bosom friend, had sent in search of him. Thereupon the disciples “repented” and were forgiven. Soon, however, a renewed outburst of jealousy on their part caused Shamsu’l-Din to take refuge in Damascus for the second time, and again Sultan Walad was called upon to restore the situation. Finally, perhaps in 1247, the man of mystery vanished without leaving a trace behind.
Sultan Walad vividly describes the passionate and uncontrollable emotion which overwhelmed his father at this time.
“Never for a moment did he cease from listening to music (sama’), and dancing;Never did he rest by day or night.He had been a mufti: he became a poet He had been an ascetic: he became intoxicated by Love.’Twas not the wine of the grape: the illumined souldrinks only the wine of Light.” 
Here Sultan Walad alludes to the Diwan-i Shams-i Tabriz (“Lyrics of Shams of Tabriz”), an immense collection of mystical odes composed by Jalalu’l-Din in the name of Shamsu’l-Din and dedicated to the memory of his alter ego. The first verse does not confirm, but may have suggested, the statement of Some authorities that grief for the loss of Shams-i Tabriz caused Jalalu’I-Din to institute the characteristic Mevlevi religious dance with its plaintive reed-flute accompaniment.
The next episode (circa 1252-1261) in Jalalu’l-Din’s spiritual life is a fainter repetition of the last. For many years after the disappearance of Shamsu’l-Din he devoted himself to Salahu’l-Din Faridun Zarkub, who as his deputy (khalifah) was charged with the duty of instructing the Mevlevi acolytes. They showed their resentment in no uncertain manner, and the ringleaders only gave in when they had been virtually excommunicated.
On the death of Salahu’l-Din (circa 1261) the poet’s enthusiasm found a new and abundant source of inspiration in another disciple, Husamu’l-Din Hasan ibn Muhammad ibn Hasan ibn Akhi Turk, whose name he has mystically associated with his greatest work, the celebrated Mathnawi (epic poem). He calls the Mathnawi “the book of Husam” and likens himself to a flute on the lips of Husamu’l-Din, pouring forth “the wailful music that he made.” During the last ten years of the poet’s life this last beloved follower acted as his khalifah, and upon his death in 1273 succeeded him as Head of the Mevlevi Order, a dignity he held until 1284, when Sultan Walad took his place.
To this first-hand account of Rumi’s life given in verse by his son the later prose biographers add little that can be considered either important or trustworthy. From Aflaki and others we hear that he was guide, philosopher and friend, not only to the Seljuk minister Mu’inu’I-Din, the Parwanah (Governor) of Rum, but to his royal master, Sultan ‘Ala’u’I-Din himself; in any case it would seem that he and the group of Sufis around him enjoyed influential support and were in a position to defy attacks on their doctrine. The poet takes a high line with his orthodox critics. He calls them “boobies” and “curs baying at the moon.”
A Platonic type of mystical love had been cultivated by Sufis long before Rumi declared that he and Shams-I Tabrjz were “two bodies with one soul.” In this union of loving souls all distinctions vanish: nothing remains but the essential Unity of Love, in which “lover” and “beloved” have merged their separate identities. In calling his lyrics the Diwan (Poems) of Shams-i Tabriz, Rumi of course uses the name Shams as though Shams and himself had become identical and were the same person. Though to us Shams-I figure may appear unsubstantial, we need not accept the view put forward by some modern scholars that he is merely a personification of Jalalu’I-Din’s poetic and mystical genius-an Eastern equivalent for “the Muse.” Those who adopt that theory must logically extend it to include Salahu’I-Din and Husamu’I-Din and can hardly avoid the implication that Sultan Walad created three imaginary characters to play the leading parts in his father’s life and in the foundation of the Mevlevi Order. Western students of the Diwan and the Mathnawi will recall a celebrated parallel that points the other way. Did not Dante transfigure the donna gentil who was the object romantic passion into Celestial Wisdom and glorify under the name of Beatrice?
II 
Rumi’s literary output, as stupendous in magnitude is sublime in content, consists of the very large collection of mystical odes, perhaps as many as 2,500, which make up the Diwan-i Shams-i Tabriz; the Mathnawi in six books of about 25,000 rhyming couplets; and the Ruba’iyat or quatrains, of which maybe about 1,600 are authentic.
The forms in which he clothes his religious philosophy had been fashioned before him by two great Sufi poets, of Ghaznah and Faridu’I-Din ‘Attar of Nishapur. The makes no secret of his debt to them both, his flight a wider range, his materials are richer and more and his method of handling the subject is so original may justly be described as “a new style.” It is a style of great subtlety and complexity, hard to analyse; general features are simple and cannot be doubt. In the Mathnawi, where it is fully developed, it gives the an exhilarating sense of largeness and freedom disregard for logical cohesion, defiance of convention, use of the language of common life, and abundance of images drawn from homely things and incidents familiar to every one. The poem resembles a trackless ocean: are no boundaries; no lines of demarcation between literal “husk” and the “kernel” of doctrine in which, i.e. sense conveyed and copiously expounded. The expounded fusion of text and interpretation shows how completely in aesthetics as in every other domain, the philosophy Rumi is inspired by the monistic idea. “The Mathnawi,”, he says, “is the shop for Unity (wahdat); anything that you see there except the One (God) is an idol.” Ranging over the battlefield of existence, he finds all its conflicts and discords playing the parts assigned to them in the universal harmony which only mystics can realize.
Sufi pantheism or monism involves the following propositions:
(a) There is One Real Being, the Ultimate Ground of all existence. This Reality may be viewed either as God (the Divine Essence) or as the World (phenomena by which the hidden Essence is made manifest).
(b) There is no creation in Time. Divine Self-manifestation is a perpetual process. While the forms of the universe change and pass and are simultaneously renewed without a moment’s intermission, in its essence it is co-eternal with God. There never was a time when it did not exist as a whole in His Knowledge.
(c) God is both Immanent, in the sense that He appears under the aspect of limitation in all phenomenal forms, and Transcendent, in the sense that He is the Absolute Reality above and beyond every appearance.
(d) The Divine Essence is unknowable. God makes His Nature known to us by Names and Attributes which He has revealed in the Koran. Though essentially identical, from our point of view the Divine Attributes are diverse and opposed to each other, and this differentiation constitutes the phenomenal world, without which we could not distinguish good from evil and come to know the Absolute Good. In the sphere of Reality there is no such thing as evil.
(e) According to the Holy Tradition, “I created the creatures in order than I might be known,” the entire content of God’s Knowledge is objectified in the universe and pre-eminently in Man. The Divine Mind, which rules and animates the cosmos as an Indwelling Rational Principle (Logos), displays itself completely in the Perfect Man. The supreme type of the Perfect Man is the preexistent Reality or Spirit of Muhammad, whose “Light” irradiates the long series of prophets beginning with Adam and, after them, the hierarchy of Muslim saints, who are Muhammad’s spiritual heirs. Whether prophet or saint, the Perfect Man has realized his Oneness with God: he is the authentic image and manifestation of God and therefore the final cause of creation, since only through him does Cod become fully conscious of Himself.
These are some of the themes underlying Rumi’s poetry. He is not their original author; they may be regarded as having been gradually evolved by the long succession of Sufi thinkers from the ninth century onwards, then gathered together and finally formulated by the famous Andalusian mystic, Ibnu’I-’Arabi (1165-1240). Ibnu’I-’Arabi has every right to be called the father of Islamic pantheism. He devoted colossal powers of intellect and imagination to constructing a system which, though it lacks order and connection, covers the whole ground in detail and perhaps, all things considered, is the most imposing monument of mystical speculation the world has ever seen. While it is evident that Rumi borrowed some part of his terminology and ideas from his elder contemporary, who himself travelled in Rum and lies buried in Damascus, the amount of the debt has inevitably been exaggerated by later commentators whose minds are filled with forms of thought alien to the Mathnawi but familiar to readers of Ibnu’I-’ Arabi’s
Fususu’l-hikam (“Bezels of Wisdom”) and al-Futuhatul-Makkiyya (“Meccan Revelations”). The Andalusian always writes with a fixed philosophical purpose, which may be defined as the logical development of a single all-embracing concept, and much of his thought expresses itself in a dialectic bristling with technicalities. Rumi has no such aim. As E. H. Whinfield said, his mysticism is not ‘doctrinal” in the Catholic sense but “experimental.” He appeals to the heart more than to the head, scorns the logic of the schools, and nowhere does he embody in philosophical language even the elements of a system. The words used by Dante in reference to the Divine Commedia would serve excellently as a description of the Mathnawi: “the poem belongs to the moral or ethical branch of philosophy, its quality is not speculative but practical, and its ultimate end is to lead into the state of felicity those now enduring the miserable life of man.” The Mathnawi for the most part shows Rumi as the perfect spiritual guide engaged in making others perfect and furnishing novice and adept alike with matter suitable to their needs. Assuming the general monistic theory to be well known to his readers, he gives them a panoramic view of the Sufi gnosis (direct intuition of God) and kindles their enthusiasm by depicting the rapture of those who “break through to the Oneness” and see all mysteries revealed.
While the Mathnawi is generally instructional in character, though it also has entertaining passages, as befits a book intended for the enlightenment of all sorts of disciples, the Diwan and, on a much smaller scale, the Rubayiat are personal and emotional in appeal. Lyrics and quatrains alike have everywhere the authentic ring of spiritual inspiration, while in image, style and language they often approximate very closely to the Mathnawi. In some of these poems the mystic’s passion is so exuberant, his imagination so overflowing, that we catch glimpses of the very madness of Divine experience. Yet the powerful intellect of Rumi the man never quite capitulates to the enthusiasm of Rumi the mystic; at the last moment there is a sudden drawing-back, a consciousness that certain matters are too secret and too holy to be communicated in words. It is not surprising to read that these poems, chanted (as many of them were doubtless composed) in the spiritual seance of the Mevlevis, roused the hearers to an almost uncontrollable fervour.
In Rumi the Persian mystical genius found its supreme expression. Viewing the vast landscape of Sufi poetry, we see him standing out as a sublime mountain-peak; the other poets before and after him are but foot-hills in comparison. The influence of his example, his thought and his language is powerfully felt through all the succeeding centuries; every Sufi after him capable of reading has acknowledged his unchallenged leadership. West, now slowly realizing the magnitude of his genius, thanks in greatest measure to the work of that fine scholar whose last writings are contained in these pages, he is fully able to prove a source of inspiration and delight not surpassed by any other poet in the world’s literature.






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series





The Delphi Classics Catalogue
 
We are proud to present a listing of our complete catalogue of English titles, with new titles being added every month.  Buying direct from our website means you can make great savings and take advantage of our instant Updates service.  You can even purchase an entire series (Super Set) at a special discounted price.
Only from our website can readers purchase the special Parts Edition of our Complete Works titles. When you buy a Parts Edition, you will receive a folder of your chosen author’s works, with each novel, play, poetry collection, non-fiction book and more divided into its own special volume. This allows you to read individual novels etc. and to know precisely where you are in an eBook. For more information, please visit our Parts Edition
page.
 
Series One 
Anton ChekhovCharles DickensD.H. LawrenceDickensiana Volume IEdgar Allan PoeElizabeth GaskellFyodor DostoyevskyGeorge EliotH. G. WellsHenry JamesIvan TurgenevJack LondonJames JoyceJane AustenJoseph ConradLeo TolstoyLouisa May AlcottMark TwainOscar WildeRobert Louis StevensonSir Arthur Conan DoyleSir Walter ScottThe BrontësThomas HardyVirginia WoolfWilkie CollinsWilliam Makepeace Thackeray
 
Series Two 
Alexander PushkinAlexandre Dumas (English)Andrew LangAnthony TrollopeBram StokerChristopher MarloweDaniel DefoeEdith WhartonF. Scott FitzgeraldG. K. ChestertonGustave Flaubert (English)H. Rider HaggardHerman MelvilleHonoré de Balzac (English)J. W. von Goethe (English)Jules VerneL. Frank BaumLewis CarrollMarcel Proust (English)Nathaniel HawthorneNikolai GogolO. HenryRudyard KiplingTobias SmollettVictor HugoWilliam Shakespeare
 
Series Three 
Ambrose BierceAnn RadcliffeBen JonsonCharles LeverÉmile ZolaFord Madox FordGeoffrey ChaucerGeorge GissingGeorge OrwellGuy de MaupassantH. P. LovecraftHenrik IbsenHenry David ThoreauHenry FieldingJ. M. BarrieJames Fenimore CooperJohn BuchanJohn GalsworthyJonathan SwiftKate ChopinKatherine MansfieldL. M. MontgomeryLaurence SterneMary ShelleySheridan Le FanuWashington Irving
 
Series Four 
Arnold BennettArthur MachenBeatrix PotterBret HarteCaptain Frederick MarryatCharles KingsleyCharles ReadeG. A. HentyEdgar Rice BurroughsEdgar WallaceE. M. ForsterE. NesbitGeorge MeredithHarriet Beecher StoweJerome K. JeromeJohn RuskinMaria EdgeworthM. E. BraddonMiguel de CervantesM. R. JamesR. M. BallantyneRobert E. HowardSamuel JohnsonStendhalStephen CraneZane Grey
 
Series Five 
Algernon BlackwoodAnatole FranceBeaumont and FletcherCharles DarwinEdward Bulwer-LyttonEdward GibbonE. F. BensonFrances Hodgson BurnettFriedrich NietzscheGeorge Bernard ShawGeorge MacDonaldHilaire BellocJohn BunyanJohn WebsterMargaret OliphantMaxim GorkyOliver GoldsmithRadclyffe HallRobert W. ChambersSamuel ButlerSamuel RichardsonSir Thomas MaloryThomas CarlyleWilliam Harrison AinsworthWilliam Dean HowellsWilliam Morris
 
Series Six 
Anthony HopeAphra BehnArthur MorrisonBaroness Emma OrczyCaptain Mayne ReidCharlotte M. YongeCharlotte Perkins GilmanE. W. HornungEllen WoodFrances BurneyFrank NorrisFrank R. StocktonHall CaineHorace WalpoleOne Thousand and One NightsR. Austin FreemanRafael SabatiniSakiSamuel PepysSir Issac NewtonStanley J. Weyman Thomas De QuinceyThomas MiddletonVoltaireWilliam HazlittWilliam Hope Hodgson
 
Ancient Classics 
AeschylusAmmianus MarcellinusApollodorusApuleiusApollonius of RhodesAristophanesAristotleArrianBedeCassius DioCatullusCiceroDemosthenesDiodorus SiculusDiogenes LaërtiusEuripidesFrontiusHerodotusHesiodHippocratesHomerHoraceJosephusJulius CaesarJuvenalLivyLongusLucanLucianLucretiusMarcus AureliusMartialNonnusOvidPausaniasPetroniusPindarPlatoPliny the ElderPliny the YoungerPlotinusPlutarchPolybiusPropertiusQuintus SmyrnaeusSallustSapphoSeneca the YoungerSophoclesStatiusStraboSuetoniusTacitusTerenceTheocritusThucydidesTibullusVirgilXenophon
 
Delphi Poets Series 
A. E. HousmanAlexander PopeAlfred, Lord TennysonAlgernon Charles SwinburneAndrew MarvellBeowulfCharlotte SmithChristina RossettiD. H Lawrence (poetry)Dante Alighieri (English)Dante Gabriel RossettiDelphi Poetry AnthologyEdgar Allan Poe (poetry)Edmund SpenserEdward LearEdward ThomasEdwin Arlington RobinsonElizabeth Barrett BrowningEmily DickinsonEzra PoundFriedrich Schiller (English)George HerbertGerard Manley HopkinsHenry Howard, Earl of SurreyHenry Wadsworth LongfellowIsaac RosenbergJohan Ludvig RunebergJohn ClareJohn DonneJohn DrydenJohn KeatsJohn MiltonJohn Wilmot, Earl of RochesterLord ByronLudovico AriostoLuís de CamõesMatthew ArnoldMichael DraytonPercy Bysshe ShelleyRalph Waldo EmersonRobert BrowningRobert BurnsRobert FrostRobert SoutheyRumiRupert BrookeSamuel Taylor ColeridgeSir Philip SidneySir Thomas WyattSir Walter RaleighThomas ChattertonThomas GrayThomas Hardy (poetry)Thomas HoodT. S. EliotW. B. YeatsWalt WhitmanWilfred OwenWilliam BlakeWilliam CowperWilliam Wordsworth
 
Masters of Art 
CaravaggioClaude MonetDante Gabriel RossettiDiego VelázquezEugène DelacroixGustav KlimtJ. M. W. TurnerJohannes VermeerJohn ConstableLeonardo da VinciMichelangeloPaul CézannePaul KleePeter Paul RubensPierre-Auguste RenoirSandro BotticelliRaphaelRembrandt van RijnTitianVincent van GoghWassily Kandinsky
www.delphiclassics.com 
Is there an author or artist you would like to see in a series?  Contact us at sales@delphiclassics.com (or via the social network links below) and let us know! 
Be the first to learn of new releases and special offers: 
Like us on Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/delphiebooks 
Follow our Tweets: https://twitter.com/delphiclassics 
Explore our exciting boards at Pinterest: https://www.pinterest.com/delphiclassics/ 






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series












Rumi - Delphi Poets Series






The Mevlâna Museum, located in Konya, Turkey, is the mausoleum of Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi.






Rumi - Delphi Poets Series






Rumi’s shrine
 








Cover










